




AFTER SANCTIFICATION 

By Tony Marshall Anderson 
Advocate Publishing House





DEDICATED 
to 
My wife, whose pure life and ceaseless prayers have 
contributed to this ministry. 





INTRODUCTION

A few Sundays ago it was my privilege to hear Dr. T. M. Anderson preach. What a 
treat it was to sit at his feet again! I told him after the message that if I 
could preach like that I would never do anything else. He chose a text, analyzed 
it, illustrated it, and drove it home with a burning soul-passion. He has the 
gift of preaching, and thousands have been blessed by his ministry across the 
years.

The great theme of Dr. Anderson's preaching, as everyone who has heard him 
knows, is holiness as a second definite work of grace. He is never more at home 
than when preaching on some phase of this subject, and he seems to have an 
exhaustless supply of such messages. He does not stop with presenting the crisis 
of entire sanctification, but he also deals with the life which follows. Entire 
sanctification, as he says, is an end; but it is not only an end, it is also a 
beginning; it is the end of sin in the soul and the beginning of a life of 
spiritual development which should be exceptional.

One of the weaknesses of holiness teaching has often been that it failed to make 
any place for progress after one receives the second blessing. We have been so 
occupied with our emphasis upon the instantaneous character of the cleansing 
from sin that we have had no time for preaching growth in grace after 
sanctification.

Fortunately, Dr. Anderson has made a place in his ministry for development after 
entire sanctification, as well as for the crisis of entire sanctification. 
Further, in the volume which he now presents to the public, he deals especially 
with the expanding life of those who have obtained Christian perfection. Every 
preacher and layman should read this book. As food for the soul, it will 
stimulate growth in grace in the individual and an aggressive spirit in the 
Church. 

Stephen S. White 





FOREWORD

This little volume is an endeavor on the part of the writer to express in a 
measure an earnest desire to be a helper to the faith of the saints.

We have felt for some time that there was need for special emphasis being laid 
upon the personal responsibility which is enjoined upon the sanctified to 
maintain the experience of heart purity, and to live out that experience in the 
fullest possible measure to the glory of God.

To invest this treasure committed to them, the sanctified must be wise in the 
ways of the Lord, and watchful over their own bodies, souls, and spirits.

It is true that a lack of knowledge along these lines has resulted in many 
falling from this holy estate. It has resulted in an arrested development of the 
spiritual life, and a constant shallowness and meagerness in spiritual 
perceptions.

The Scriptures tell us that, "The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: 
he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon ... They shall still bring forth fruit in 
old age; they shall be fat and flourishing." All this the righteous man should 
be to "shew that the Lord is upright."

If this little book shall add anything to the lives of the saints to cause them 
to be fat and flourishing, it will serve the purpose for which it has been 
written.

We believe that the proper incentive of all holy endeavors should be to seek the 
glory of God by letting our lights shine before men. Holiness touches every 
phase of human life in this world among men. To let their light shine the 
sanctified must bring their best efforts forward in a diligent application of 
themselves to fulfill their high calling in Christ Jesus. Sanctification 
involves them in the necessity for a patient continuance in well-doing.

What follows in this volume is not an exhaustive treatise on the subject. It is 
far from being exhaustive in any phase of the matter under consideration.

This is only an earnest effort to be suggestive along certain lines of truth 
pertaining to the life and experience of heart holiness. By touching upon these 
outstanding facts, this writer has hopes of inspiring a greater diligence, a 
careful watchfulness, and fervent service, on the part of God's holy people. 

T. M. Anderson 





CONTENTS

1 After Sanctification 
2 Virtue Added to Faith 
3 Knowledge Added to Faith 
4 Temperance Added to Faith 
5 Patience Added to Faith 
6 Godliness Added to Faith 
7 Brotherly Kindness Added to Faith 
8 Charity Added to Faith 
9 Entrance Into The Everlasting Kingdom 





SCRIPTURE LESSON 

II PETER, CHAPTER 1:1-11

Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have 
obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our 
Saviour Jesus Christ: grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the 
knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord, according as his divine power hath 
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the 
knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue: whereby are given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of 
the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through 
lust.

And beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue 
knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to 
patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly 
kindness charity.

For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither 
be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath 
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election 
sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall: for so an entrance shall 
be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ. 





Chapter 1 

AFTER SANCTIFICATION 

"Giving all diligence, add to your faith."

As the forming of man from the dust of the earth, breathing into him the breath 
of life, making him a living soul in the image and likeness of God was the 
crowning work of God in creation; so also the lifting of a fallen man from the 
depth of sin, breathing into him the life-giving fullness of the Holy Spirit, 
sanctifying him wholly, making him the image of God is the crowning act of the 
new creation of the redeeming Christ.

As man was put upon probation and held responsible for his acts by which he 
could make for all present and future happiness or destroy all present happiness 
and forfeit all future enjoyments, so also are the sanctified put on probation 
and held responsible for their acts by which they can enhance their present 
happiness and assure themselves of a future blessedness, or they can at will 
destroy their present spiritual state and enjoyments, and forever forfeit their 
eternal hope.

God has placed himself under promise, and confirmed it by an oath, that all who 
have fled to Him for refuge shall have a strong consolation to lay hold of the 
hope set before them, because He has put all His resources at their command to 
save them to the uttermost extent of their probationary sojourn. All He has 
provided He has placed within reach of all who will by faith trust Him, and in 
love obey His will. But upon this faith and obedience on the part of His holy 
people depends their destiny.

To all holy persons are given exhortations, admonitions, and warnings. The 
Scriptures abound in these, thus emphasizing the personal responsibility resting 
upon each individual who is sanctified. There are also precepts, promises, and 
prohibitions by which all holy persons are to be governed, encouraged, and 
warned.

There are boundaries beyond which they must not pass, promises which become 
valuable assets and resources of wealth and power spiritually, and precepts 
which govern every phase of life and conduct while in this world.

Knowing these things to be true, the question of what follows holiness becomes 
one of absorbing interest to every person in this experience. The aid of the 
Holy Ghost is pledged to the sanctified, that by His help they may know what is 
necessary for them to do, and be enabled to perform all things which pertain to 
their salvation.

The fact of individual responsibility cannot be overemphasized. It runs parallel 
with every responsibility which God assumes in the preservation of His people. 
The exhortation to keep ourselves in the love of God is followed by the truth 
that He is able to keep us from falling, and present us faultless before the 
presence of His glory with exceeding joy. The prayers of a holy people are as 
necessary to their enrichment and preservation as the intercessions of Jesus. 
Nothing can take the place of either. To place all responsibility upon Christ is 
presumption; and to assume all responsibility without Him is conceit. There is a 
measure of responsibility which God unfailingly takes which is the source of 
greatest encouragement to all in this holy way. There is a measure of individual 
responsibility which we must take, apart from which salvation is impossible.

There is another fact about holiness which must be enforced, namely, the fact of 
development.

The first man, for example, was a new creation standing at the threshold of 
limitless possibilities, both in the unfolding and developing of his own soul 
and life and in knowing God and making new discoveries about the Infinite. Only 
God knows what would have been the state of man had he never sinned, and blasted 
his hopes.

The sanctified are new creations. They are as sinless as was the first creation. 
They are created in Christ Jesus in the moral likeness of God. They stand at the 
threshold of limitless possibilities in character building and development. They 
likewise are privileged to know Him, the infinite One, who has redeemed them and 
made them kings and priests unto Him forever.

Holiness is then both an end and a beginning. As the attainment of an end, it 
means the end of sin in the soul. This has been obtained through the cleansing 
blood of Christ, and wrought in the heart by the fullness of the Holy Ghost.

The sanctified stand at a beginning as the result of cleansing. Much that is 
purchased for them in the atonement for the enrichment of their holy souls in 
knowledge, love, and graces lies before them. They have crossed their Jordan, 
and the land lies before them, a possession to be developed.

The fall of man was twofold in its result. It resulted in a depravation of the 
nature; and it also resulted in a deprivation of privileges which were his by 
the rights of creation.

The removal of sin from the nature of man entitles him to all forfeited 
privileges. Redemption in its full meaning restores the redeemed to the state of 
holiness, and makes them heirs to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and 
that fadeth not away.

When Jesus said, "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God," He 
showed the extent of redemption. To be pure in heart is to be free from 
depravity. To see God follows as a natural result. To see God means not only to 
vision Him, but to fellowship with Him, to live with Him, to enjoy Him through 
all time and eternity, as was the right of the first man before he sinned.

Holiness, therefore, places us at the threshold of all blessedness. It 
guarantees the resurrection of the body, and eternal triumph over death. It 
meets the one condition necessary to live in the new order of things which shall 
be set up when God gives us "new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. It is preparation to receive Him when He comes "to be glorified 
in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe." It capacitates the 
sanctified to live eternally with God, and be at home in His presence. 


All these things are seen with the eye of faith, and guaranteed to the 
sanctified by the promises of God in Christ. But all these things which are yet 
the object of hope, and which the sanctified have sealed to them in the earnest 
of the Spirit, are conditional. They are to be given to those who are made holy, 
and who maintain their purity unto the end of their earthly life. A fall from 
purity will result again in a depravation and a deprivation, as it did at the 
beginning of creation.

Therefore, in order to make their calling and election sure, the sanctified must 
give diligent heed to all precepts and prohibitions which govern their lives. 
Such obedience follows after holiness (sanctification) if they obtain the crown 
of life.

Thus far we have only slightly pushed back the sky line of hope and hinted at a 
few of the things which are to be pressed toward as prizes in the high calling 
of God in Christ Jesus. We will now take the facts up from another viewpoint, 
and try to show them from another angle.

The divine purpose in the creation of man was that he was to glorify God. To 
this end man was created, and for that purpose primarily. Man was endowed with 
every virtue, and faculty, and capacity necessary to fulfill this purpose. 
Everything in the created world in which God placed him was to contribute its 
life and being to the man; and the man was to contribute his life to the glory 
of God. Sin defeated this end, and degenerated man into a selfish creature, who 
lived for himself, took all from God's creation to support his own life, and 
gave nothing to God in return.

Redemption reverses this order in that it turns man back to the original 
purpose, and makes him to the praise of His glory. Then holiness must result in 
man's glorifying God.

The sanctified life is a life lived to the glory of God. The sanctified are to 
show forth His praises, who hath called them out of darkness into His marvelous 
light.

Therefore, it becometh the sanctified to apply themselves most diligently to 
excel in this calling; and they must devote themselves to the best and most 
efficient manner of living of which they are capable, that God may derive the 
greatest possible glory out of their lives. They are to develop their 
characters. They are to advance in knowledge of ways and means for effective 
ministries. They are to master their infirmities. They are to break out of their 
limitations and disadvantages wherever possible. They must practice self-denial. 
They must arm themselves with a mind to suffer. In some things they are to be 
slow, and in other things they must be swift. They must be as wise as serpents, 
and as harmless as doves. They must suffer poverty that some other may be rich. 
They must know how to be abased, and how to abound. They are to love some things 
and hate some things. They must live, yet reckon themselves to be dead. They 
must be pilgrims and strangers, and kings and priests. All these, with many 
others yet unmentioned, but which are fully revealed in Scripture as their rule 
of life, they must do and be, that He may be glorified in them and they in Him.

In the light of these facts the exhortation, "Giving all diligence, add to your 
faith," becomes imperative. All that these words imply follows after holiness 
(sanctification). 

The apostle has not left us without instructions concerning what should be added 
to faith. He gives seven cardinal virtues, which are but seven channels through 
which a holy life is poured out to the glorifying of God on earth and in heaven, 
for all time and eternity. These graces are as follows: "Giving all diligence, 
add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; 
and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness 
brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity." These blend with one 
another, and overlap into one another, forming the white light of holiness. 
These become the road map of the sanctified who would find the gates of heaven.

These graces and capacities are all in the sanctified soul; but they are not all 
mature or fully developed. They may exist under a rough human exterior, and be 
hampered by human ignorance and limitations; but every sanctified individual 
possesses them.

It becomes the duty of the sanctified to develop these in their lives and 
practices. These graces are like seven members of a choir, which are to be 
developed and led out into a fuller usefulness by an efficient leader. To add 
them to faith does not infer that they are to be acquired as an addition to 
holiness. It means that faith must be supplied with these to make it the more 
practical and efficient in achieving the grand end of holiness, which is to 
glorify God. If faith without works is dead, then these must lead to those works 
which make faith a living, practical, working factor in the world.

To glorify God one must touch every interest which is good among men. God is to 
be glorified before men by the outshining of redeeming grace in the good works 
of His holy people. They are to be as a city which is set upon a hill; it cannot 
be hid. Holiness must place the life in full view of all men, and so shine in 
purity of purpose and righteous acts that they will be constrained to glorify 
God.

After holiness (sanctification), what? Give all diligence to add these things to 
faith, and the answer will be found. 





Chapter 2 

VIRTUE 

"Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue."

Virtue stands at the head of the list of those basic elements of holiness. It is 
a word of strong meaning. It embraces the thought of purity as a quality. To be 
virtuous means not only to be negatively pure, but to be positively pure. Virtue 
is the beauty of holiness. It possesses all those qualities which make a holy 
person lovable and pleasing in every trait of character. Virtue is saintliness 
It is that which makes the sanctified glorious unto Christ.

To add virtue to faith implies the necessity of intensifying its usefulness by 
permitting it to shine out unhindered. It is the light of holiness which must be 
undimmed in its shining. The quality of virtue cannot be improved upon because 
it is the very essence of purity; but it can be so applied in the course of a 
holy life that it will be intensified and enlarged. It can be put to the most 
practical uses in living out a sanctified life. It will win against the greatest 
opposition, and break through the worst prejudice, as nothing else can possibly 
do.

Holiness as expressed in the quality of virtue is invincible against the foes of 
Christ. With it the people of the Lord can put to silence the quibblings of 
foolish men.

The very fact that virtue is to be added to faith shows that it is an active 
quality of holiness rather than passive. The fact that it is in the sanctified 
is not sufficient; it must be in them and abound to save them from barrenness 
and unfruitfulness in that perfect knowledge of God.

Virtue is not an ostentatious display of holiness which parades itself before 
men as a Pharisee; neither will it hide its light under a bushel with a 
pretended humility which is moral cowardice. One cannot possess holiness of 
heart without feeling that he must do something to help mankind and glorify God. 
A pure people are a people zealous of good works.

This means that holiness must be expressed in activity through the quality of 
virtue. The thoughts, words, and deeds of a holy people are to show forth in 
virtue. Nothing must ever be done through strife or for vainglory; but all 
things must be done without murmurings and disputings, either among themselves 
or with the world, that they may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God 
without rebuke in the midst of a perverse world.

To bring virtue into play in the living out of a holy life will greatly enhance 
the value of holiness in the estimation of all men. It cannot be spoken against. 
None can gainsay it. Virtue will be the key that will unlock every door closed 
against Christianity. It can create opportunities. It can open the way for the 
preaching of holiness in any place on earth. Virtue is the answer to every man 
who asks for the reason of the hope within us.

To add virtue to faith one must be aggressive in religion and yet not be 
forward. He must evangelize without being considered a proselytizer. He must 
witness without contradiction from sinners. Virtue robs the holiness fighter of 
all ammunition. Even Satan cannot furnish an excuse that will justify a 
criticism of holiness when virtue is in evidence. The fiercest fire cannot burn 
it, and savage lions cannot devour it. Virtue needs no trumpeters to herald its 
going forth. It needs no peculiar dress or garb to mark its possessor. It rises 
and shines in the beauty of holiness like the sun. It blesses the world with its 
beneficent rays. It has the fragrance of the rose, the glory of the lily, and 
the purity of a sunbeam.

Virtue is too humble to feel its worth; yet its price is above the ruby. Virtue 
has the luster of the pearl and the scintillations of the diamond. Virtue is a 
crown jewel of the King of Kings set in the heart of the sanctified.

Witnessing to holiness is adding virtue to faith.

God has woven into the scheme of world evangelization and redemption the human 
factor. The sanctification of the believer results in his having a share in this 
scheme of things. God has limited himself to the human agency in many respects. 
He depends on His people to perform certain duties, which can never be done 
without them. To say that God can get along without the human element in the 
work of bringing the gospel to the world is to misrepresent facts. Jesus is the 
Vine, and His saints are the branches. The fruit which He, the True Vine, bears 
must be borne of these branches.

Witnessing is done by word of mouth and example of life. A true witness is so to 
speak and do as to show forth Christ's virtues, which are provisional in Him for 
all men and reproduced in His people as a witness to all men.

In Him is life for all men. His witnesses must bear witness to this fact. Also, 
His life is the light of men: His witnesses must reproduce the life of Christ in 
their own lives, which becomes the light of men. When He was in the world, He 
was the Light of the World. Now that He has made atonement for the world in His 
death, ascended to the right hand of the Father as High Priest, and will return 
from thence to judge the world; He hath not left the world without light. His 
people are the light of the world, shining forth in holy living. By word of 
mouth this world must know that He is the only Saviour from sin. By example of 
life; this world must see the evidence of this in the lives of His people. 
Virtue gives authority to the word spoken; and virtue gives power to it by the 
life which backs it. Diligence to add virtue to faith in witnessing is the 
wisdom of the sanctified.

In witnessing, the sanctified must be careful lest they fail to show forth 
virtue. The real self must be holy; but the manner in which the witnessing is 
done may obscure that fact, and dim the shining of holiness, and discredit the 
Lord in the eyes of the world.

The essential elements of witnessing by word of mouth and example of life are 
courage, kindness, humility, and courtesy. To show virtue these must combine in 
a unit in witnessing.

Sanctified persons may impair their usefulness unless they give careful heed to 
combine these elements in their witnessing. To fail to do this may not be due to 
carnality, but rather to a lack of watchfulness and proper poise. Most 
sanctified persons can look back with regrets to times when they failed to show 
their best self because they were not so thoughtful of these things as they 
should have been. Advancement in spiritual knowledge of ways and means of better 
witnessing will result in a finer and more perfect show of holiness.

Courage is fundamental. It is back of all witnessing. It is always in demand. 
Moral courage has placed missionaries in the remotest parts of the earth. It has 
constrained men to undertake what seemed the impossible. Courage underlies all 
phases of the responsibility of witnessing. Courage, sweetened with kindness, 
balanced with courtesy, and proceeding with humility, constitutes true 
witnessing to Christ. Many sanctified persons suffer from timidity. They are 
hindered by a form of stage fright which greatly impairs their usefulness. 
Timidity is not due to carnality. It is not moral cowardice. It is due to 
several causes, other than moral.

Sanctification does not rid all persons of a timid and shy spirit. They may be 
persons who are naturally timid and retiring in disposition. It is 
constitutional with them, and not moral lack. No seeking at an altar will 
overcome it. Yet this robber of the saints must be overcome. Courage must master 
this infirmity. Practice will make perfect in witnessing. Timidity will only 
pass with the holy exercise of giving testimony at every opportunity. 


Sanctification does not produce a veteran at one stroke of saving grace. It 
requires experience to produce veterans who can stand in the heat of a battle 
without trembling. Courage is an element of sanctification, and when it is 
brought into action it will master all phases of timidity, and speak boldly for 
the Lord.

The graces of the sanctified are a marvelous combination. Courage must approach 
almost to the place of becoming forwardness; yet humility applies the brake at 
the proper moment. To witness, one must also approach to boasting; yet to fail 
is to suffer spiritual loss.

Witnessing makes demands upon the sanctified as nothing else can do. To them it 
means something more than mouthing words, or uttering catchy phrases to provoke 
levity. It is a serious matter demanding serious reflections. It is the approach 
to a crisis moment where souls may be saved or lost as the result of it In 
addition to this, they are conscious of a deep sense of unworthiness; yet they 
are rejoicing in deliverance from sin.

The cynic and the critic are present to sneer and find fault Yet with courage 
and love the sanctified give humble testimony to saving grace; and, backed by a 
holy life, they are unafraid of contradiction. For this the Lord pays them 
witness fees which enrich their own lives beyond all compare. They develop in 
all graces, growing in stature and in favor with God and men.

Kindness must never be overlooked by those who would show virtue in witnessing 
to holiness. There may be certain persons present who are prejudiced against 
this truth. The combative spirit will not emphasize true holiness. Darkness 
cannot be driven out of a mind with a club; it will take light to banish it. 
Many have failed as witnesses because they did not sweeten their testimony with 
kindness after they had courage to give it. Display holiness by showing virtue 
in kindness. Do not obscure it by the lack of this.

Courtesy must keep to the front in witnessing to give poise to a holy life. It 
is easy to get off balance and topple over into the error of being personal in 
testimony. It is not best to testify at the folks. Give testimony before them, 
but not at them. To be discourteous and not respect their personal rights and 
opinions will discredit the life of holiness. The enemy may suggest that now is 
the time to skin the opposition. Not many persons appreciate the skinning. 
Holiness is not an acid; it is a sweet. It is not a caustic; it is a balm. 
Respect for the opinions of others is not a compromise of holiness. It is 
Christian courtesy to do it.

Christian courtesy is too considerate of the rights of others to overstep its 
own rights and infringe on the rights of others. Witnessing is not always done 
by preaching and exhorting. It is often done by reporting the present 
experience. There is a time to preach, if one is called to do so. There is a 
time to exhort, if it is in order. But to become the center of attraction and 
take most of the time which belongs to others is not always the best way to 
exemplify virtue in applied holiness. To curb zeal is not quenching the Spirit. 
The fact that a failure to do so often dampens a meeting proves it is not always 
pleasing to the Spirit. Hundreds may be present whose spiritual lives would 
greatly develop if they had an opportunity to give their testimony, but are 
denied the right because someone failed to consider them and took more time than 
necessary. 

Personal sacrifices and thoughtful consideration for others in these things will 
increase the value of a holy life, and intensify the shining of the white light 
of true holiness.

The personal life cannot be separated from the personal testimony. It often 
speaks louder than the words. One had better live more than he professes than to 
profess more than he lives. For, after all, the life is back of all like the 
gold in the bank is back of the currency without which it is of no value. To 
keep the lowest level of life above the highest word of profession is true 
virtue. The terms used to express sanctification in testimony must be explained 
by the manner of living.

The attitude which some opposers of holiness have taken toward this doctrine has 
been made such by the manner of living of some who have professed higher than 
they lived. This creates a situation most difficult to overcome. A sanctified 
man should command the same respect among any people that Jesus would command 
among the same people. They should accept or reject such a one upon the same 
grounds they would accept or reject Jesus. The virtuous life of Christ and the 
virtuous lives of His people are the same; for virtue is an evidence of 
holiness, whether in Him or in His people.

The wise man said that it was the little foxes which spoiled the vines, for the 
vines had tender grapes. It requires a closer watch over ourselves to guard 
against the little things than it does to guard against the larger. An allowance 
is always made for mistakes; but wanton acts, be they small or great, are 
inexcusable in the sanctified.

The scope of every man's life has at least three phases, namely, his business 
life, his social life, and his home life. If one will live according to holiness 
in these three departments of life, he will have covered the whole of life in 
this world as it relates to others.

Scrupulous honesty in every line of business, promptness in meeting all 
obligations involving finance, making the word as good as the bond, freedom from 
miserly proclivities and close bargaining, will enhance the estimate of holiness 
among right-thinking persons

Purity in every social relation becometh a virtuous person. The name, the 
reputation, the family of any person is safe from all harm at the hands of one 
that is holy.

Social laws and customs may be observed until they conflict with conscience 
based on holiness of heart. But a good conscience is paramount. This applies to 
all social customs and fashions in dress and behavior. The dress question is 
creating a serious problem in the holiness movement of the day. Little headway 
is made against checking its entrance into the church. It bids fair to stay, 
notwithstanding all the preaching and legislation against it. There is a 
solution of the problem for all who will accept it. Let virtue be added to faith 
in refusing to cater to any social custom, no matter what the cost may be, and 
it will be solved. The grace of God solves all social problems arising in any 
age of the world. If holiness be paramount in the purpose of life, then all who 
have it will dress accordingly. Those who are otherwise minded have something to 
learn.

Holiness of life extends to every intricate problem of the home and family. An 
acid test of it is often made in the common events of everyday life in the home. 
It is true that one is different when at home from what he is anywhere else. The 
tension and restraint are dropped when one crosses the threshold of the home. 
The true self is seen in this humble place. There is no "put on" at home. No one 
to see but the family; but who are they but those for whose salvation God has 
made us responsible? Think on these things, and give diligence to the manner of 
life among all persons, in all places, and under all conditions. There was One 
whose life emanated an influence for good which this world has not forgotten. He 
touched every phase of life among men. Virtue was shown by Him in every 
department of the world where men traded, associated, and dwelt. Make Him the 
example of virtue, and you will have nothing to fear before man and God. "Giving 
all diligence, add to your faith virtue." 





Chapter 3 

KNOWLEDGE

Giving all diligence, add to your faith ... knowledge.

By this we understand that the mental faculties are to be put to the best use in 
living out a holy life. To love God with all the mind means to put all mental 
powers at His command, and to make every effort to develop in the knowledge of 
all that is good. Life is enlarged in proportion to the development in 
knowledge. One can be satisfied with little if he knows but little.

That which makes a man different from the lower animals is his capacity for 
knowledge. If he fails to develop in mental power, he will rise no higher than 
the animals.

There is a member of the wasp family which rolls a ball of mud, carries it to an 
eave or ledge, and there builds a mud-celled nest. In this it deposits its eggs. 
It catches spiders, stings them in the nerve centers to paralyze them, packs 
them in with the eggs, and seals the opening. The eggs hatch; the grubs feed on 
the spiders and grow to maturity. These roll balls of mud, build nests, catch 
spiders, and the process continues in this cycle unchanged in all time. The 
insect has its boundaries of knowledge fixed by nature. It cannot advance beyond 
these boundaries. It has no capacity for any further instruction. But a man can 
advance beyond the boundaries nature has set for other creatures, because God 
created him in His own image and endowed him with a mind capable of advancement. 
Man can tower up in the mental image of the Infinite.

Holiness enjoins the responsibility of every sanctified person's advancing in 
knowledge of a specific kind. There are some things which he must know which are 
vital and essential to his own salvation. There is a wisdom ordained of God to 
bring us to glory. It is likewise essential that the sanctified develop in 
knowledge in spiritual things in order that they may live out a consistent life 
in the fear of God. It must be remembered that one is useful to God in 
proportion to his knowledge. He can get the more efficient service and the 
greatest glory out of one who is wise in the things of God. A wise scribe has 
access to a storehouse of treasures, out of which he can bring things both new 
and old. The effectiveness of the ministry to which God has called any person 
depends upon the application that person makes of himself to advance in 
knowledge. "Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not 
to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth." This admonition must not be 
overlooked by any who are in this holy way. 

Sanctification perfects one in knowledge of a certain degree and kind. The 
sanctified know God in this act of cleansing in a manner different from all 
other persons. They have the mind of Christ in a degree unknown to any who are 
not sanctified. The veil of sin has been taken away from the mind and heart, and 
they are able to behold the glory of the Lord with open face. But there is an 
advancing from glory to glory in knowledge which continually lifts them to 
higher degrees of spiritual life, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. It is the 
Spirit's office work to take the things of Christ and show them unto His people.

Adding knowledge to faith becomes imperatively necessary. But let it be 
knowledge of the right sort. To further this end, we specify some phases of 
knowledge essential to the sanctified.

Some limitations which the sanctified should know.

When we speak of the limitations of the sanctified we have in mind certain 
infirmities and constitutional hindrances which this grace does not remove, 
together with certain other things which this grace does not impart. To know 
what holiness. has not clone, and, knowing this, be governed by these facts 
without becoming unsettled when these limitations are encountered and felt, will 
make for happiness and contentment in a holy life. To know self, this new, 
sanctified self, is necessary in living out a life in the beauty of holiness.

Sanctification does not prevent mistakes.

Mistakes are not due to carnality; neither are mistakes sins. But all mistakes 
are more or less serious in their consequences. It is impossible to escape the 
consequences of mistakes, no matter how honest and sincere the person was who 
made them. Mistakes are due to a want of knowledge, very often. To know the 
truth about God, and how best to serve Him in the various ways of holy service, 
will keep mistakes reduced to the minimum. Therefore, the sanctified should 
apply themselves diligently to add knowledge to their faith, for in so doing 
they will escape the dire consequences resulting from mistakes.

Sanctification has been experienced by some persons who were very crude and 
rough in their make-up of life. This grace can exist under a rough and uncouth 
exterior. It is a treasure put in an earthen vessel which was greatly marred by 
sin. Such persons have many things to learn as to the best methods of living out 
this grace. They make some very serious blunders while in the primary grades of 
learning the way of the holy walk. The world is critical, ever looking for an 
opening to discredit the work of holiness. If they can find the least failure or 
mistake on the part of the professor of this grace, they are ever ready to seize 
upon it as justifiable grounds to repudiate holiness. If for no other reason 
than to convince the ungodly, the sanctified should endeavor to be as free from 
mistakes as it is possible under the light of the Holy Ghost.

Mistaken notions of God can be entertained by holy persons, and result in 
cramping their life and hindering their effectiveness. These false conceptions 
of God work serious hardships to themselves and to others. To know Him as He is 
in love, mercy, patience, and sympathy is life eternal. Such as know Him thus 
are free indeed. God has not given us the spirit of fear. He gave us the spirit 
of love, and of power, and of a sound mind. To know that He is holy is to know 
that He is not bound to those whims and caprices which ignorance has accredited 
to Him. 


Mistaken notions of God have narrowed the lives of some good people to such an 
extent as to rob them of much joy and pleasure which is their due. To conceive 
of God as a kind of a universal policeman who hides behind every corner to spy 
on His children and catch them off guard, that He might accuse them of 
infidelity, is to entertain a mistaken notion of His love which pitieth His 
children as a Father. Holiness is not a rigid, Pharisaical manner of life. Nor 
is it a license to familiarity with God. Holiness is the only natural, normal 
life one can live and be a human being as God designed one should be. To make it 
otherwise is ignorance of true holiness. One holy man said that he was 
sanctified many years before he discovered that "God had good sense." Those are 
his exact words. They serve to illustrate the point. The more one thinks of this 
statement, the more its truth stands out. Many who are sanctified will do well 
to discover this about the Lord.

To some He is so rigid in His requirements, so unbending in His justice, and so 
unsympathetic in His nature, that to be like Him they cease to be human beings. 
In no wise is this a picture of the Lord. Super-sensitiveness of conscience is a 
false standard of holiness. To develop the conscience to such a point that it 
becomes sensitive overmuch is a mistaken notion of holiness. A tender conscience 
is necessary, but not one that feels offense if one laughs or otherwise 
expresses life normally. Holiness is the happy way between an evil conscience 
and fanaticism. Its possessor has no conscious sense of evil within; neither is 
such an one on a strain. Holiness is rest of soul. Perfect love has cast out 
fear which hath torment. To know Him as He is, and not as we have made Him by 
the mistaken notions that have been entertained of Him, will save us from those 
mistakes which have resulted in religious narrowness. It will prevent that 
dwarfing of the mind which results in an arrested development in holy living.

Mistakes are often made in moments of religious fervor and zeal, which prove 
afterward to be sources of trouble to the sanctified. Vows and promises are made 
at such times with the purest of intentions; but when later they find these 
cannot be fulfilled because of certain limitations within themselves, they 
become a prey to the devil's accusations. Besides this, the conscience, because 
of their lack of knowledge, will condemn them.

A good woman once came to the altar under my ministry. She had gotten into 
serious spiritual difficulties because of these very things. She had been 
sanctified. At the time of her reception of this experience some unwise friends 
came to her and informed her that the Lord had impressed them that she was to 
do a certain thing. Because she failed to take into account her own limitations, 
and under the ecstasy of her new experience, she promised she would perform the 
service the Lord wanted her to do. It turned out that she was to conduct 
preaching services in the city jail. Her first service was joyful because she 
had liberty in talking to the prisoners. Her next visit was not so easy because 
she found she was not in possession of much material for preaching; to offset 
her poverty along that line, she related her experience. But the next Sunday it 
was more serious, because she had told her experience, and used all her 
available preaching material; so she blundered through the services, and the 
hardened criminals laughed at her. Now she refused to return for other services. 
She considered she had broken her vow made to the Lord. Such was her state of 
mind that she was now in doubt about her experience, believing she had grieved 
the Lord and lost her experience of holiness. The whole thing came of her not 
knowing her limitations, and abiding by them. 


The facts are that no one is made a veteran in performing services for the Lord. 
Sanctification did not give that woman preaching material for such services. And 
to vow to do a thing without considering whether one is able to qualify is a 
mistake. God does not hold such promises, made under such occasions, binding. He 
tempers the load which everyone is to bear.

Sanctification does not call for services to be performed beyond what one can 
reasonably do. It calls for a pure life, but not an unequal task. None of His 
commandments are grievous to be performed. Furthermore, other persons' 
impressions for us are not to be taken seriously. If the Lord has any ministry 
to be performed, He will tell the one whom He calls, and not trust it to erring 
persons.

Development in knowledge will prevent persons from making extravagant claims, 
which have been the bane of the holiness movement. Visions and revelations may 
be merely a figment of the imagination and in no wise produced from divine 
causes. God has given a full revelation for all time in Jesus Christ. His Word 
is the rule of faith and practice.

The cults that have sprung up within the last few centuries, which claim to be a 
further revelation of God, are false. These are but the cunning devices of men 
to overthrow the faith of the saints. It is also true that many of them are 
laying emphasis on some truth, while they blind their adherents to their errors. 
Some holy people are so wanting in knowledge of essential truths that they are 
swept away from their moorings to holiness, and engulfed in the error of some 
cult that has gained notoriety under the healing propaganda, or other 
spectacular advertisements and methods.

Holiness of heart is the one thing essential to salvation. The acid test to 
make of all cults is to determine what disposition they make of the sin issue. 
If they do not make holiness a point of major emphasis, they are false. Holiness 
is not a side issue in religion. It is fundamental. It is all there is in 
religion to be sought after. Many will come into judgment who have many 
marvelous works to their credit, even to casting out devils; yet they will be 
disowned by the Lord because they worked iniquity. They were not holy.

Sanctification does not prevent sickness or material losses from befalling the 
sanctified. The holy suffer like the unholy, many times. It may seem needless to 
say this, which is so obviously true. Yet there are those who mistakenly 
considered this grace to be a source of prevention of the ills and misfortunes 
of life. Holiness of heart has resulted in certain great privileges accruing to 
the people of God, which privileges they can use according to the will of God. 
It was the devil and unwise men who accused Job of being afflicted because he 
was not holy. But afflictions and losses are not any sign of unholiness in those 
who suffer them. Knowing these things as Job knew them will prevent one from 
charging God foolishly.

Faith for healing can sometimes be exercised with ease, and again it cannot be 
commanded to achieve this end. The reason for this does not lie within the moral 
standing of the believer. It may be that God has reasons unknown in His own good 
will for His children. To vow never to use any remedies, but rely on faith and 
prayer, is a grave mistake. It tends to fanatical claims which cannot be 
substantiated in Scripture. The same God who put food properties in the wheat 
that makes the bread to maintain life is the same God who put medical properties 
in the herbs and minerals in the earth which do cure some diseases, and 
counteract and prevent others. An instance of this error will serve to 
illustrate the truth. Years ago a good man dropped a harrow on his foot, the 
tooth penetrating deep into his instep. He steadfastly refused even to wash it 
with an antiseptic, but in company with his friends he prayed for healing. He 
even went so far as to say that he would be healed, because the Lord had 
promised to do it. He died of lockjaw, a victim of his own error and folly.

It becometh the sanctified to apply themselves diligently to know how to adorn 
the doctrine and experience of holiness with a beauty that will commend it to 
all right-thinking persons. Their mistaken ideas and fanciful notions often 
detract from the great truth of holiness rather than recommend it.

What holiness is has been greatly obscured by the unwise actions of many good 
people who profess it. Their extravagant claims have often proved impractical 
and impossible and unreasonable, serving only to discredit holiness before the 
community. It is very easy to topple over into extremes and lose all spiritual 
balance and poise, and become fanatical, claiming many things which cannot be 
done. If the devil cannot pull one back into sin, he will try to push him across 
the line into fanaticism and grievous errors. These errors may not result in the 
loss of the soul, but they do greatly limit the effectiveness of holiness.

Follow peace and holiness as life's pursuit, never turning to either the right 
or left to take up with anything which does not adorn this profession with 
honor. Consider that healing and all other things which are only privileges, and 
not necessities, are not the main issue. Holiness of heart is pre-eminent. 
Emphasize that experience, and live it with good sense in the sight of all.

Sanctification does not impart talent.

Knowing their limitations in this respect, many sanctified persons will find 
their place in the service of the Lord for which they are qualified, and in that 
service find delight. Many are misfits and failures, not because they are not 
sanctified, but because they are undertaking to do that of which they are not 
capable. David was better equipped with his sling and stones than he would have 
been had he insisted on wearing Saul's armor.

A mistaken idea about holiness which many have is that they can do anything if 
they are sanctified. The sanctified are vessels meet for the Master's use, and 
prepared unto every good work. But it is true, nevertheless, that not all are 
talented alike. The grace of God does not impart talent; it only purifies the 
believer and enables him to use all his talents to the glory of God.

An instance will suffice to illustrate this. A good woman was persuaded to 
become the teacher of a Bible class. The fact that she was a sanctified woman 
had led to her election for this position. But she was a failure as a teacher. 
She was naturally retiring in her disposition, and had no ability for teaching. 
The class lost interest, and dragged along in a manner disheartening to all. 
She came to this writer for advice. Her first question was, "If I were 
sanctified, could I not do anything?" She was questioned as to what she felt she 
could do. For it is sure that all holy persons can do some things, but not all 
things. She related how she had gone about the city, and found the sick, and 
mothers with such families that they were not able to get to a church often; and 
with these she prayed and read the Scriptures. She had built up a regular 
circuit among this class. In this she found great joy, and her ministry was 
fruitful. But in the position of teacher she was a failure. She was advised to 
resign her position as teacher, and continue her work among the sick and the 
poor. The latter service was her calling She was capable of performing it. The 
other was not within her ability to perform; in it she was a misfit.

The want of knowledge on the part of the sanctified as to their limitations in 
talents has worked many hardships among them. Many have found they had no 
pleasure in the service they were trying to perform because of limitations 
within themselves which holiness did not remove.

There was a difference in talents among the disciples of our Lord. No two of 
them were alike in every respect in their abilities to serve in their respective 
callings. Some of them have not been mentioned except in name. If they preached, 
or wrote, or asked a question, the records fail to show it. They were all holy, 
but not all were used in the same manner. Those who did write of their 
ministries reveal that there was a marked difference in their talents.

The great consecration chapter, Romans twelve, reveals this truth. The 
presentation of the body must be done by all. The transformation will be the 
experience of all. The good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God will be 
for all to prove. But not all shall have the same measure of faith, nor the same 
ministry to perform.

One may prophesy, another may minister, another may exhort, another may teach, 
and another may give. All members of the same body have not the same office. One 
is an eye, another a hand, and another an ear. These all have not the same 
office, but all are necessary.

Sanctification is a transforming grace, but it does not impose responsibility 
beyond the capacity of any person to perform. There is always something holy 
persons can do for the Master. Let them find what they can do, and do it. But do 
not permit the devil to discourage if some things cannot be done and failure 
results.

Because of physical, mental, and natural limitations no holy person can ever 
live out all he would, nor all he feels within. The imprisoned spirit beats 
against these bars like the wings of a caged eagle longing for freedom. Songs 
and hymns make melodies in the heart which one would like to sing from the 
mountain-tops. But he cannot sing. There is no talent for song except in the 
heart. Someday God will remove these limitations; then let the angels draw nigh!

Thoughts and sentiments sweep through the confines of the soul, making the whole 
body tingle with the ecstasies of their sweetness. But these cannot be put into 
writing because the mind is dull, and words to express them cannot be found. Let 
the pure do all possible to apply themselves to the utmost of their capacities; 
but let none of them be discouraged if they find themselves bound by 
limitations.

Consecration means the giving of the all of self to Him, nothing more. There are 
limitations in every man beyond which grace never takes him. God demands a man's 
best always, but nothing beyond that 

Knowing these limitations and frankly refusing to go beyond them will surely 
exemplify holiness with the right spirit. There is nothing quite so pathetic as 
the sight of sanctified persons out of their places in service. These get out of 
place because they see not their own limitations. It is possible for holy 
persons to think more highly of themselves than they ought to think with respect 
to their capacities for service, and by so doing become misfits. Many are in 
official places in the church who should resign gracefully. They are wanting in 
vision and executive ability. They hinder the growth of the church because they 
drag rather than pull. These often refuse to take the initiative in anything 
that will advance the work. If they would only see their own limitations, and 
willingly resign their positions to others, then join in helping the others to 
serve in a better leadership, it 
would surely enhance the value of holiness.

The sanctified should know their privileges.

What privileges are extended to these that they should seek to know? Beyond what 
boundaries shall they not pass? The answer is that their privileges are as great 
as the grace of God. The boundaries for love and spiritual advancements 
terminate where the horizon of the eternities dip. To know the privileges which 
are accorded the sanctified is to know true riches of grace in Christ Jesus.

We know that the holy have started at a beginning which hath no end. All He has 
promised to do for His people has not been exhausted when He sanctifies them. At 
their disposal are put all things which make for their good. God wants them to 
know these things and, in so knowing them, to benefit by them.

The discoveries of modern science in the realm of electricity, and other forces 
and powers, are modern only in discovery, and not in existence. These forces of 
nature have been existing since the world was created. They were here when the 
Egyptian kings used their crude methods of transportation when they built the 
pyramids. They were only ignorant of them. If no effort had been put forth by 
men to know the wealth, resources, and forces about them, they would be as 
uncivilized as the bushmen. But knowing these things has added to their 
happiness and lightened their burdens.

The same facts obtain in the spiritual world that obtain in the natural world. 
God has opened to the sanctified a new realm in which they are at liberty to use 
that which they will. All the land on which the soles of their feet shall rest 
shall be theirs. Thus to acquaint ourselves with God-given privileges will add 
knowledge to faith, and result in a rich and useful Christian life.

Knowing the possibilities of prayer is necessary.

So vast is the unexplored realm of prayer possibilities that we hesitate to 
offer suggestions. The mere rim of this ocean of truth has only been touched. 
"If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it 
shall be done unto you." That is as big as the demands of life. It is bounded 
only by the will of the abiding saint. "If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I 
will do it." Here Jesus obligates himself to become a servant to His people. "I 
will do it." They do the asking; He does the work. 

What power, then, is at the disposal of the holy man! He can with the right use 
of his privileges harness God's omnipotence to the task of holy achievements. 
Before such power mountains of difficulties will be removed from his way.

Many know these things are promised. They believe them in a way. But weakness 
and poverty of spiritual life prove that they have not been used. These 
privileges are to be known experimentally. They must be proved by use to be 
known by experience.

Some may possess a slight knowledge of electricity, knowing something of its 
possibilities; but if it becomes necessary to wire so this power may be used, 
their knowledge is too limited to be of use. It becomes necessary to employ an 
expert, one who does know how to harness this power.

We may possess the knowledge of the power released through prayer in such a 
meager way as to limit our usefulness, and impoverish our souls. God would have 
His people be experts in the art of prayer. To add knowledge to faith is 
imperatively necessary if we would be saved from barren and unfruitful lives.

There is a ministry of prayer.

The ministry of prayer to which all holy persons are called, we fear, is little 
known and, because of this lack of knowledge, is little in use. By a ministry of 
prayer we mean utilizing the promises of God in behalf of others through 
intercession. Paul used the ministry of prayer for the churches, almost as often 
as he used his ministry of word. Many of his epistles contain prayers which ask 
for saints things that no word of mouth could describe. There are things of the 
Spirit which can come to the soul only by His supply through prayer.

Persons in one continent have upheld others in another through the ministry of 
prayer. Some have been called from sleep by the Spirit, and urged to pray for 
another many miles away, and by it delivered him from imminent peril. God has 
evidently limited himself in a great measure to the prayers of His people. This 
we do know, some things would never have come to pass had not someone prayed 
when he did. Privileges in this ministry have been but little used. They open a 
great field of endeavor to all who will diligently seek to know more of their 
worth.

Know the scope and range of prayer. 

"In every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests 
be made known unto God." Here is revealed the range and scope of prayer as 
including "everything" -- everything that pertains to the natural, physical, and 
spiritual life and welfare of His holy people. Everything from the greatest 
needs to the smallest details of life, God is ready to hear prayer concerning 
them.

It is often true that some will make the big things of life a matter of prayer, 
but overlook the lesser things. Those things which add to the weight of care 
accumulated in the course of a day are not beneath the notice of God, who careth 
for us. There are many petty aggravations met within the course of a day which 
sorely try the soul. One may bear them with grim determination, and live a holy 
and patient life despite them; but God will surely help His children to bear 
their petty trials with a greater ease if they will ask Him. It is in these 
smaller matters that many are suffering greater trials than in the storms which 
sometimes break with fury. The care of the family, the sense of responsibility 
in providing a living, rest with little weight upon the heart and mind of those 
who make the Lord a partner in their lives.

The people of God may ask Him to direct them in all business and financial 
matters. They may ask Him to provide them with work when in need of a position 
to earn a living honestly. Nothing is a matter too great or too small to make a 
matter of prayer, seeking for help, or guidance, or light, as the case may be. 
If it is of concern to us, it is within the scope of prayer, and God will help 
with grace in the time of need. Those who have learned this secret will find a 
joy unspeakable and full of glory filling their whole being as they advance in 
this holy way.

Know prayer as a source of supply for building Christian character. 

"Building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost." 
Through prayer new material is supplied to the soul. Those who pray much grow 
large in spirit and faith and love. Their faith groweth exceedingly. Their love 
aboundeth more and more in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. They take on 
the proportions of a generous spirit from whose innermost parts flow rivers of 
living waters.

Little, dwarfish lives are due to the want of spiritual light and knowledge 
which can come only through intercession.

During seasons of prayer the Spirit whispers to us, telling us how we may 
improve our usefulness by mastering certain faults and infirmities. Seasons of 
waiting on God result in a strengthening with might by His Spirit in the inner 
man. Prayer becomes a kind of a conference held with the Lord from which one 
comes renewed in faith and hope, stronger in determination, and broader in 
vision. Knowing how to go from strength to strength by using the privilege of 
prayer will develop the character of the sanctified as nothing else will.

Know prayer as being the one safeguard against discouraging and trying 
conditions, which shall try the souls of the sanctified. 

"And he spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray, 
and not to faint." Prayer is a means to prevent our giving up under the trial of 
world conditions which shall develop in the last days. Jesus had been telling 
what things should happen in the world prior to His second coming. Such 
conditions as shall prevail shall be exceedingly severe in trying the souls of 
His elect. The moral standards of the social order will be as low as that of 
Sodom. The spirit of the world will be one of pleasure madness, and excesses in 
sensuality. Persecution will be severe. Tribulations and distresses will come 
with the fury of perdition.

He promises that God will avenge His elect which cry day and night. These have 
resorted to prayers that brook no denials and know no discouragements. 

Not only world conditions will add to the discouragements of the elect; but also 
the seeming slowness of the Lord. He may see fit to bear long with them, but He 
will avenge those who importune as the widow did the unjust judge.

Many who have the preparation of the ten virgins, all of whom would have entered 
in had the Lord not delayed His coming, may prove themselves to be foolish 
because they failed to pray always and not faint.

The lamp will not go out if the vessel is filled with oil to have in case of a 
delay. To break down in prayer life is to give up in weakness and lose the prize 
awaiting those who endure to the end. To endure thus, Jesus says, we ought 
always to pray.

The whole armor of God and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, 
are not sufficient equipment to stand against the wiles of the devil and 
withstand in the evil day. It requires a "praying always with all prayer and 
supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and 
supplication for all saints." Knowing these things to be privileges extended to 
the people of the Lord in order to secure them against fainting, let every 
sanctified person take heed, and give diligence to add this knowledge to his 
faith. Self-preservation is the first law of the nature of the sanctified. They 
are preserved, not by natural equipment, but by utilizing the divine resources 
at their command through prayer.

To faith must be added further knowledge of God.

Sanctification does not graduate the believer in the knowledge of God so that 
there is nothing else to know about Him. The sanctified have a very meager 
knowledge of Him compared with what is yet possible for them to know about Him. 
Their privileges in this respect are unlimited. The security of their own souls 
depends upon their knowing all they can about Him while they are in this world.

Holiness does result in the believer's knowing God, as has been shown; it also 
conditions that person to advance in a knowledge of Him far beyond the 
conception had of Him at the time such a one was sanctified. This means that 
all holy persons are privileged to have further revelations of God made to them 
by the Holy Spirit.

Paul, knowing these privileges, and seeing their importance, prayed the 
following prayer: "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, 
may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: 
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the 
hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the 
saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who 
believe."

Here then, the "eyes of the understanding" are to be enlightened by the "spirit 
of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him." This is something beyond what 
is known in the experience of holiness. This is an advancement in knowledge 
along three lines. They are to know what is the hope of His calling. They are to 
know the riches of the glory of His inheritance in His saints. And they are to 
know the exceeding greatness of His power to usward who believe. 

The saints have two directions in which they are to look. They are to look back, 
remembering the pit from whence they were lifted, and forget not to thank God 
for His many mercies. They are ever to thank Him for deliverance. The song they 
sing in heaven is the song of deliverance.

But they have a forward look, and an upward look. The greatest things are yet to 
come. They have received only the earnest of their inheritance. It has not been 
revealed what we are to be, but we know when it shall be revealed we shall be 
like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. Hence the necessity of knowing God is 
seen, because in such knowledge we are to know that to which He has called us. 
Know the hope of His calling.

Ignorance of what is for the people of God in full redemption has caused some to 
sell their birthright for a morsel of meat.

Moses made his great choice to suffer afflictions with the people of God, 
esteeming the reproaches of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, 
because he had respect unto the recompense of the reward. He looked to that 
which was before him, and forsook all; for he endured as seeing Him who is 
invisible. Abraham saw the city which had foundations, whose builder and maker 
was God; he was content to be a sojourner and pilgrim in the earth ever 
afterward, living in the hope of His calling. Paul forgot the things which were 
behind, and reached forth unto the things which were before; he pressed toward 
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

If the people of God will consider the things which are not seen to be eternal, 
the afflictions of life will be counted "light afflictions" which endure but for 
a moment. They have nothing to go back to, and everything that is of real worth 
is before them; so let all know the hope of His calling, for in such knowledge 
there are security and encouragement.

Know the riches of His inheritance in His saints. The Lord's portion is His 
people. They are to Him a treasured people. They are the pearl of great price 
which Jesus sacrificed all to purchase.

Redemption reveals God to be a social Being. His glory and pleasure are not in 
things but in persons. Redemption means the bringing to Him a people in whom He 
can take pleasure. He has through Christ cleansed and sanctified the Church, 
that He may present it to himself a glorious Church, a body of sanctified people 
who shall be a source of eternal delight and pleasure to Him. "Unto him [is to] 
be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end." 

"In the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together in one 
all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in 
him: in whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according 
to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will: 
that we should be to the praise of his glory."

Surely in the face of such truth the sanctified should be greatly encouraged in 
the knowing of these things. Give all diligence to add to your faith knowledge 
of Him. 

Know what is the exceeding greatness of His power to usward who believe.

God's power manifest in the saving of the soul from sin is great, but that which 
is put at the disposal of the saved to enable them to overcome all enemies, 
perform all duties, and preserve themselves without spot and blameless unto His 
coming, is equally as great.

The human infant is the most helpless at birth of all creatures. It is utterly 
dependent on others. It has no natural weapons for defense. Man has survived on 
the earth in the struggle for existence because he is endowed with intelligence. 
He can, through the faculty of the mind, invent ways and means of escape from 
foes. He can harness powers to serve him in all purposes of life. Because God 
designed man should rule the earth, He gave him the mind by which he could 
acquire that knowledge so necessary to his own life and happiness. The same 
truth obtains in the nature of things in the spiritual world. A person who is 
saved from sin, and comes into spiritual life and existence, is as helpless in 
many respects as an infant. Such a one is as dependent upon God as a child is 
dependent upon its parents. The child instinctively clings to its parents for 
protection and sustenance. So the child of God naturally looks to the Heavenly 
Father for protection and life's necessities.

Sanctification no more gives the holy a full understanding of the evils and 
perils that threaten them than birth endows an infant with a full knowledge of 
the world into which it has come. Neither does sanctification impart full 
knowledge of the power and grace that are to usward that believe.

But God, as a wise Father, will protect His helpless children as the apple of 
His eye. He guards them with a tender carefulness. They must rest upon His bosom 
of love without fear, never doubting the love which overshadows them. "In whom, 
though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and 
full of glory."

Now growth and development advance the child beyond the state of helplessness 
because it acquires knowledge of things about; it learns to make use of the 
forces and laws of the world for its own good and safety. By so doing the child 
becomes a source of greater joy to the parents. Strength by wisdom makes for 
more happiness than weakness through ignorance.

Growth and development in the sanctified life make for happiness and 
independence. Not 
that such ever become independent of God. But they know how to utilize the 
powers of God placed at their command and become independent of circumstances 
and things, in that it is not necessary for them to see or feel in order to be 
happy. They know God will not leave them nor forsake them; therefore they are 
careful for nothing. They are not happy because they are rich in things; but 
they are happy because they are rich in a faith in the God of all things. Bread 
is promised them day by day. Knowing this promise is theirs, they are 
independent of conditions that threaten them with want. God has a way of 
providing for His own. All these things shall be added unto them.

The story is told of a man who eked out a life made wretched by poverty in 
raising cabbages on the side of a mountain filled with gold. He died ignorant 
of the wealth he possessed. Holiness has made the sanctified heirs of God. They 
need not eke out a precarious existence when all things are theirs. "Whether ... 
the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are 
yours; and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's."

All that is in the world which is necessary to life and happiness God will give 
to His people. Redemption has made the world theirs. Life present and life 
eternal are theirs through Jesus Christ. All things that pertain to life are 
given them through the knowledge of Him that hath called them to glory and 
virtue.

Death is theirs because they are conquerors over it through the exceeding 
greatness of His power to all who believe, "according to the working of his 
mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and 
set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places." He "hath abolished death, 
and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel."

Things present and things to come are theirs. All present trials are sanctified 
to their good. All things present and future are to work together for their 
good. God will press men, angels, and devils into service and cause them to 
contribute to the eternal good of His holy people. In the knowing of these 
things there is security, because faith for them is based upon the knowledge of 
them. Then give all diligence to add to your faith knowledge, for in so doing 
you shall never fall. 





Chapter 4 

TEMPERANCE 

"Giving all diligence, add to your faith ... temperance."

The work of sanctification has cleansed the whole man in spirit, soul, and body. 
The whole is then put under the dominion of the will.

The experience of holiness does not result in the removal of the natural 
desires, and appetites, and affections; it only results in their cleansing, 
placing them at the command of the will. To be temperate, a holy person must 
keep these desires of body and mind in their proper place. Self-control becomes 
a part of his daily effort in maintaining a holy life. Self-control becomes a 
form of self-denial which every sanctified person must practice. To deny the 
normal desires of body and mind to be indulged beyond a certain limit is the 
wisdom of holy living.

Sanctification has made the human being a new creation, comparable only to that 
creation of God which He pronounced good. Such a being has not the least of sin 
in his nature. The sanctified are put in charge of their new sell as the first 
man was in command of himself. They have all the natural affections and 
appetites necessary to human happiness, but these are to be kept in the 
subjective, being governed by the will, which will is in conformity to the will 
of God. A desire for knowledge is normal, as Eve had when holy. A desire for 
food is normal. A desire for the beautiful is normal. But to yield to the 
tempter and indulge these in ways that God forbids is to sin and die. 

Temperance in things pertaining to the body.

The body becomes the temple of the Holy Ghost when the work of sanctification is 
complete. "Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is 
in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a 
price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's."

That which has bordered almost on blasphemy is the teaching that the body is a 
corrupt and sinful thing which constitutes a weight to be borne through life by 
Christians. It is sanctified unto the Lord, a temple in which He is to dwell by 
the Holy Ghost To defile it is to take a member of Christ's body and prostitute 
it to unholy ends. God will hold us responsible for the care of this, His 
sanctified dwelling. Through His grace we are to preserve it blameless unto His 
coming.

The body is weak and infirm, but not sinful. It is human flesh, but not carnal, 
beastly, and sensual. It will receive its immortal touch in the resurrection, 
being translated into the likeness of His glorious body; but until then, let us 
keep it a fit place for Him to dwell on this earth.

To be temperate one must keep the spiritual above the physical. The material and 
physical man must have things. There is no way to become independent of things 
necessary to the physical life in this world. God has promised that these 
things, such as food, clothing, shelter, shall be added. He knows His children 
have need of them before they ask.

The desire for things can become so abnormal as to work a hardship on us. The 
desire for comfort can develop into a craving for luxury. The body loves ease. 
It responds to all that makes for ease and plenty. God knows this weakness in 
us, and often keeps us poor in order to get us to heaven. There are not many 
rich in this calling.

A holy man should be trustworthy if God sees fit to prosper him. If he will 
rightly use his wealth, it can be a great blessing. But too often such are 
intemperate in that they fill their homes with expensive equipment, purchase 
high-priced cars, and otherwise cater to the flesh for ease while the unsaved 
world cries for the gospel from a Church too poor to furnish it.

Again it is true that things can so congest the life as to rob the spiritual 
nature and impoverish it. The legitimate and necessary things of everyday living 
can become a source of slavery to the body. So many things press in to be done 
that time to pray and read the Word is crowded into a small place. Jesus put 
the premium on self-control when he reprimanded Martha for being cumbered with 
much serving. She had gone to much trouble out of pure devotion to the Lord to 
make Him a great dinner. The much work of doing this had robbed her of the 
gracious words that fell from the Master's lips. She could not understand why 
Jesus would not rebuke Mary for her indifference to the work to be done. Jesus 
said to her, "But one thing is needful." That is, one simple dish of wholesome 
food was all that was necessary for bodily needs. If Martha had given less time 
to needless work, she could have had more time for the better part, which should 
have not been taken away from her.

Lack of temperance in this respect has been the cause of spiritual weakness and 
starvation of soul. Work must be done. The affairs of life must be attended to 
in the proper time. But it is true that they can get out of all bounds and 
reason because we are too much in the flesh, and live too close to the world of 
things. Say to work, "Stay thou here unfinished, until I have gone yonder and 
prayed." In this manner will the spiritual take the ascendancy over the 
physical, and a holy life will be preserved.

It is likewise true that the body, because of weariness and fatigue, can add a 
drag to the spiritual. It is often a great handicap to overcome. Proper rest has 
not been taken for the body. The reasons for such may be, as we think, 
justifiable. But there is no reason why one should not rest properly. Certain 
circumstances may militate against this, but it is the better part of wisdom to 
rest at the cost of sacrifice of things, rather than drag through life always 
too weary to be spiritual.

The best time to pray and devote self to spiritual things is in the early 
morning. It is then that the body is refreshed and the mind clear and alert. 
Sacrifice of some moments of sleep will result in a rich spiritual life. It will 
start each day right. It will fortify the soul against the adversary. If the 
labors of the day have made one too weary to pray at night, simply commit the 
soul to His care, and get in bed and rest. Do not try to pray when too weary to 
be normal in this holy exercise. So control self as to do this when refreshed in 
the morning.

Have set times to be in prayer. The life lived on a hit-and-miss method is 
always a small and starved life. If things must be done in the morning, things 
that have a set time to be done, then arise early, and devote some time with 
God. Fix the time and the place of daily worship, and let nothing encroach upon 
this hour. It will pay large dividends to the soul who will invest in it its 
best. Master things or things will master you. And no man can serve two masters. 
Mortify the deeds and needs of the body, and you shall live.

Temperance in the realm of the mind must be added to faith.

The mind must be kept within certain legitimate bounds if we would be holy. 
There are desires of the mind as well as desires of the body. The mind can be 
indulged like the flesh. The mind has its capacity for pleasures. It is the eye 
of the soul. Through the mental faculty one can go back over the past and live 
over its scenes in detail again. It can borrow trouble from the future, and 
create mountains of difficulties to be overcome which exist only in the 
imagination. When idle it becomes the most vulnerable spot for the devil's 
attacks.

To control the mind is necessary to maintain holiness. Sanctification cleanses 
the mind. But it becomes the task of the sanctified to keep it in proper 
channels.

All sanctified persons have found they have wandering thoughts in prayer. This 
is due to the lack of mental control and concentration. To shut the door while 
praying requires effort. To refuse to let the mind engage in a season of 
wanderings, while we mouth words in the effort to pray, requires self-control. 
This infirmity has resulted in much defeat at the mercy seat. Such come from the 
place of prayer in defeat and dissatisfaction. They did not hear from God Their 
souls are yet athirst for His blessing and assurance.

This same lack of mental control defeats many holy people in the public service 
where the Word is preached. They are sure to look about at the least disturbance 
of the coming and going of people. They have failed to keep their minds upon the 
truth preached, and thus it is lost forever. They go away with little or no 
profit derived from the message. Distractions had taken the mind off the 
service. They were impoverished by it.

It is beyond all question that, through the mind, holy persons can fall. If the 
will is not exercised to keep the mind on holy things they are in grave danger 
of spiritual loss.

Paul said to a holy people that they should think on things that are true, 
honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report. The God of peace will be with 
all who think on these things.

The whole nature responds to the thoughts. The body with all its desires is 
immediately aroused through the mental faculty. All the cravings of the fleshly 
appetites are stirred into action by thoughts. Some who have fallen into 
terrible sin have had their powers of resistance undermined probably years 
before that by their meditations. They allowed themselves to think on things 
that compromised them in the sight of God. It afforded certain pleasure so to 
think, though they had not the slightest intention of doing the act. Such 
thinking opened a way to the enemy to assail them. Through the mind the will may 
be made to yield, and in giving consent of the will sin is committed. The mind 
of the sanctified is under control of the will. A clean mind must engage in 
clean meditations. "Let the ... meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy 
sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer," is the prayer of the holy man. 
"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee." This is the 
confidence we have in Him. But we must stay the mind on Him if we would have 
perfect peace.

The tongue must be under perfect control. Be temperate in speech.

Carefulness in word is necessary to the living of holiness. Nothing can so 
effectively show forth a holy heart as a well-ordered conversation. "Who is a 
wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him shew out of a good 
conversation his works with meekness of wisdom." "So speak ye, and so do, as 
they that shall be judged by the law of liberty." "If any man offend not in 
word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body." These 
scriptures speak for themselves. A sanctified person must set a watch over his 
lips, lest he be misjudged by those who do not fully understand him. Words fitly 
spoken are evidences of self-control. The speech that is seasoned with salt -- 
not too much as to make it brine, but properly seasoned -- is a token of a 
well-ordered life.

Words betray feelings, emotions, desires, thoughts, and affections. There is no 
better way to control these than to control the speech. Religion is vain if the 
tongue is not bridled.

Sanctified persons have felt the checks of the Spirit many times when they were 
intemperate in their speech. To fail to profit by these checks will lead to 
grieving the Spirit, followed by serious loss to the soul.

Certain matters are never to become topics of conversation to a holy people. 
They are admonished not even to mention them, as becometh saints. Leanness of 
soul follows in the wake of loose conversation. Foolish talking and jesting 
about matters that are not convenient, or not up to the standard of holiness, is 
unbecoming of a sanctified soul. Paradoxical as it may seem, yet it is true that 
sanctified persons walk with their mouths. To walk as children of light they are 
admonished to take heed to their speaking.

To be temperate, the eye must be under control.

It has been estimated that 75 per cent of knowledge is gained through the eye. 
This being true, then what a source does it prove to be for the world, the 
flesh, and the devil to tempt a holy man! What holy man is there who has not 
found it necessary to close his eyes that he may win the victory in a time of 
temptation? Jesus said if the eye was single the whole body would be full of 
light. If the eye is kept to a single purpose, that of looking at the pure and 
clean things in the world, then light does flood the soul. But darkness follows 
when the eye is permitted to rove at will. Few there be who know the meaning of 
our Lord's admonition when He said, "If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out." 
This was something to be done, not in order to obtain life, but to maintain 
spiritual life. It is not necessary to pluck out an eye in order to be born; 
but it is often necessary to remove a member of the body that one may continue 
to live.

The eye is not to look upon that which can never be a lawful possession, if the 
look is one with desire. All sanctified individuals have such possessions as 
lawfully belong to them. These are given to satisfy the demands of their own 
lives. Having these things, they are to be content, and look not with desire 
upon any other person's possessions. The line between lawful desire and lust can 
be crossed by a look. The boundary between what is rightfully ours and what 
belongs to another can be passed with a covetous look without much jar. To look 
with desire is the same as the act committed. Give all diligence to add 
temperance to your faith.

The affections must be under perfect control of the sanctified.

Man is naturally a creature that loves. He must love someone or something. Also 
he craves to be loved by something that can reciprocate his own affections. 
Human love is natural To want to be loved is natural But to misplace the 
affections is sinful. Christian love is sacrificial. Carnal love is selfish. The 
former gives all. The latter takes all.

Sanctification brings the soul into the state of perfected love. That is, God's 
love is perfected in the soul by the gift of himself to the soul. Such as are 
sanctified have given their all to Him as a love gift. But this higher affection 
does not exclude the lower form of love which is purely human. It loves others 
of its own kind and kin. Such love is natural; but it must be kept in a lesser 
place, because to love God is pre-eminently the greater form of love. Therefore 
all sanctified persons have their friends and relatives and loved ones as a 
God-given right; but these must be kept in the second place. In order to keep 
these in their proper place the sanctified must control their affections.

Human love can become a kind of passion which develops into a worship of the 
persons loved. It will enslave itself to the detriment of the soul. It becomes 
inordinate love when not under control. Sanctification does not result in a 
crushing of the human affections; it regulates them. It does not give a stoical 
outlook on life's relations; it gives a proper balance to them. 

Holiness has resulted in an exaltation. It is the bringing of the life into the 
likeness of His resurrection. "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those 
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your 
affection on things above, not on things on the earth. For ye are dead, and your 
life is hid with Christ in God." In this scripture is shown the proper control 
of the affections. They are set, or fixed, on that which is above. They are not 
to become earthly in their seeking. Keep them heavenly, and they will be pure. 
To do this a holy people must continually recognize that they are dead to all 
earthly loves of persons and things. They have hated their lives in this world 
in order to keep them unto life eternal. To hate the life in this world simply 
means to deny it first place. God has the first place in the affections. 
Spiritual life is pre-eminent over the temporal life. By so keeping these first 
things first, the lesser things will be made the more enjoyable.

Jesus said a man was to hate his father, mother, sister, brother, wife, 
children, houses, and lands, or he could not be his disciple. These are hard 
sayings, but true sayings. Such as will so deny themselves of all these will 
find that God hands them back sacred and sanctified into a new relationship. 
They shall have a place in the affections, but not the first place. This leads 
us to specify some ways in which the affections may be misplaced, leading to sad 
results.

Intemperate affections for persons.

The love which enslaves the reason and will is not pure; it is inordinate. This 
may be a love for persons who have no spiritual life as well as for those who 
do. It may be love for those who are related by the tie of family and blood. And 
it may be a love for those who are related in other ways. The favor, friendship, 
and reciprocated love of these may be greatly desired, which is natural that it 
should be. But so to love them as to heed their advice, which, if obeyed, would 
lead to acts that would displease God and impoverish the soul, is inordinate 
affection. Such affection is never to control the reason and will. It must never 
be permitted to go beyond the bounds where conscience forbids. The love which 
Adam had for his wife he let exceed the bounds of his reason and will. He took 
of the fruit and did eat. It led to his willful sin.

Many sanctified persons have been enticed from the way of holiness because they 
have compromised through their natural human affections. They loved unwisely. 
There is nothing sinful in the human affections. But they must never go beyond 
the proper bounds which God has placed about them.

A setting of the affections on things above, and refusing to let them become 
merely earthly, will often lead to suffering. Such suffering will be caused by 
the misunderstandings which those we do love have of us. Devotion to the worship 
of the Lord often invites their criticism. Refusing to accompany them to places 
they would go leads to their saying harsh and unkind things. The heart aches 
because of the love had for them, yet the pain is borne for His sake whom to 
love is joy and peace. This attitude they cannot understand. They are led to say 
that the church and religion have separated their family. A boundary is made 
across which loved ones must not be permitted to draw our affections. The pure 
will stop at a given point, and suffer untold agonies before they will go beyond 
this to please their unsaved relatives. 

Such a stand taken by the sanctified cannot be understood by the unsanctified. 
They cannot appreciate the transcendent love of the sanctified for God. To them 
such are beside themselves.

There is no way to explain this situation to those who have no eyes to see or 
ears to hear. A holy people must suffer as a result of their love for Him which 
prevents their sinning against Him for the sake of any human relationship.

God loves humanity with a love that sacrifices and suffers for it. But God's 
love never goes beyond the bounds of His own nature, which is holy. He loves the 
sinner enough to die for him. But God will never effect a compromise with the 
sinner's ways. He does not fellowship with sinners, but He does fellowship with 
redeemed sinners.

In a very true sense are all holy persons like God. They love the unsaved of 
their own household and acquaintance. But they will not compromise their 
holiness through a form of love that is unnatural in its demands. They would 
suffer and die for the unsaved whom they love if it would save them. But they 
will not fellowship with them in their ways to the displeasure of God, merely to 
have peace with them. A higher form of affection prevents the human affection 
becoming unnatural in the sanctified. It is kept within its proper bounds as God 
designed it should be.

There is another form of affection which may lead to dire results because it is 
not controlled. It is that love which leads to marriage and home building. That 
this is something sacred and God-ordained is beyond all question. Yet, like 
every sacred thing, it can be abused and made a source of sin and unhappiness.

The love which leads to wedlock is normal. There is nothing unnatural about it 
if properly placed under the control of the will and reason. The sanctified 
cannot marry at will without giving due consideration to the matter as it may 
affect their after life. Being married to an unsaved companion before one is 
sanctified is quite different from deliberate marriage to an unsaved man or 
woman after being sanctified.

A sanctified woman said to me during a discussion of the reason why certain fine 
talented women had never married, "We are the product of what we believe." No 
greater truth could have been uttered which so fully gave the meaning of 
holiness, and the control of the affections. These women would rather remain 
unmarried than permit their natural affections to cause them to take steps which 
they had a right to take, yet which they believed were contrary to the higher 
love they had for God. We fear that not everyone can receive this truth. It 
restricts the human affections in a way not so easily obeyed. It touches the 
side of life which is most sensitive. Failure to deny self in this very matter 
has led to disastrous results. It has in more than one instance defeated the 
purpose of God with that life consecrated to Him for service. Men and women both 
are found who are out of the will of God for life's work because they married 
without due consideration of their calling. They never were able to answer the 
call to the mission field because they have tied themselves down in wedlock to a 
companion that refuses to go. Ministers have hindered their whole life in the 
ministry because of their steps in the matter of marriage. 

Through their natural affections they have handicapped their lives, and limited 
their usefulness, by giving up to the human affection which was not a sin within 
itself, but was misplaced and uncontrolled.

Holiness results in a complete change of ownership. "Ye are not your own. For ye 
are bought with a price." A sanctified person is God's property by right of 
redemption. Such a man or woman cannot do as they please with God's property 
without displeasing Him. To give over to obey any natural desire or inclination 
that may gratify them is the repudiation of the consecration made. God will not 
deny to His people the gratification of any natural instincts necessary to their 
happiness. Holiness of heart does not crush, or forbid, anything in life that is 
normal. But a holy people are a peculiar people. They cannot do as others. God's 
will is the governing principle of life to them. No desire or ambition to them 
is over gratified, no matter how natural it may be or how human it is to do it, 
if in it they cannot glorify God in the largest possible measure. Hence, to be 
temperate in this respect, denying the human affections lest we get out of the 
will of God, is the fine art of holy living; it adds temperance to faith, 
virtue, and knowledge.

There lurks yet another danger to be avoided by the control of the affections, 
Love between man and woman is ordained of God. They each have been created for 
the other. It is lawful for every man to have his own wife, and for every woman 
to have her own husband. Love ceases to be love and degenerates into sordid 
passion and lust when it passes beyond these bounds.

The Christian religion has not been entirely free from certain sects who under 
its cloak have practiced free love and other kindred evils. In many instances 
the intense religious devotions have led to loose morals because of ignorance 
and lack of self-control.

Pure religion is pure love. Love is an ecstasy affording great pleasure. The 
more intense one is in pursuit of religion the nearer he approaches the border 
of fanaticism. Fanaticism is due to loss of spiritual equilibrium and poise. 
License is taken for liberty and lust for love when the balance of the soul is 
lost.

Among the subtle and deceitful evils into which good people have been led are 
those along the line of affinities; these people form soul-mates which they 
choose. We hear of heavenly and spiritual marriages. The woman becomes 
dissatisfied with her husband. He is so unsympathetic and irreligious. She longs 
for the comfort and sympathy which she is denied. The devil sees to it that a 
so-called brother, be he preacher or layman, comes along at the proper time to 
offer the consolation. An infatuation springs up. An affinity is formed. The 
results often lead to the utter ruin of all concerned. The whole thing was 
started when a natural human affection was overbalanced for lack of control, and 
degenerated into lust and sin as the consequence.

Offering spiritual comfort to a person unhappily married, by any member of the 
opposite sex, is a dangerous procedure. One walks on the brink of hell whose 
duties call for such a ministry. The human affection when ungratified responds 
naturally to any show of sympathy and understanding from another party. It will 
fasten itself with a grip of death to anything that offers support. It may start 
pure and end debased and vile because it gets beyond control. 

It is in place to heed Jude's words: "Others save with fear, pulling them out of 
the fire." Beware, lest the garments be spotted by the flesh.

The sanctified are exposed to the gravest dangers. They have need for the 
greatest wisdom and self-control. Their every natural and normal desire affords 
the enemy an opportunity to attack them. They must walk circumspectly and not as 
fools. They must watch and pray lest they enter into temptation.

We mention yet another evil to be avoided by a watch over the affections. The 
love of the world.

John admonishes the whole body of Christians to love not the world. It is 
directed to "little children," whose sins are forgiven. It is given to "young 
men ... [who] are strong, and ... have overcome the evil one." It is for 
"fathers." These last are mature saints, of whom it is said, "Ye have known 
him." No state of grace precludes the possibility of any person's ever reverting 
to the world again. Sanctification does not render any one invulnerable to the 
world's appeals. The world was used as a source of temptation to Jesus.

Mammon has drawn into its bosom many who were Samson's of power, and shorn them 
of their locks while they slept under its caress of pretended innocence. It lays 
siege to the heart with a persistence that cannot be taken lightly. It makes a 
tremendous bid for every man. It exerts a great pressure upon him from all 
sides.

Every person is born with a desire to possess persons and things for his own. 
This desire is normal and legitimate. It must be kept from degenerating to the 
sensual gratification of the flesh. Such a desire can be directed toward 
possessing God, and the things of God; and with that holy end in view, the 
things of this world can be used as a means to that end, and not an end within 
themselves.

John tells us what the world contains which we are not to love. "All that is in 
the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of 
life, is not of the Father, but is of the world." This trinity is purely of the 
world. It is destined to pass away, with the lust thereof. Those persons who set 
their love upon such a transient and unstable thing as the contents of this 
world are doomed to eternal failure and ruin. To look to it for satisfaction is 
to make the mistake of the rich fool, who thought that his soul could be 
satisfied with the fullness of his barns. It is always night where such a man 
lives. He lives in the darkness of his own deluded senses. In a time he least 
expects will he hear the voice that speaks, "Thou fool, this night thy soul 
shall be required of thee."

For one who has known the love of God to turn back to the love of the world is 
comparable to the sow that was washed returning to her wallowing in the mire.

But let none feel they are secure from such defeat. This formidable foe is 
relentless and terrible. It challenges the strength of every saint's will and 
determination. Into its toils have fallen some who had a high standing. This 
infernal trinity is alluring to every sense of the body, mind, and soul. If 
there were not a danger, God would not have warned us. 

To be temperate in all things to be seen with the eyes, enjoyed by the physical 
senses, and possessed as goods taxes the ingenuity of the sanctified. Indeed, 
such must keep the anointing of the Holy One on them that it may teach them all 
things. He who, despite the pull of the world, does the will of God shall abide 
forever.

The danger of a misplaced affection by the sanctified is not entirely passed 
when they refuse to become in bondage to the world's ease and luxury. Neither is 
it passed when they refuse to purchase their entertainment from it. To be 
crucified to the world is one thing; but to recognize that the world is 
crucified to them is quite another. Holiness of heart means death to every 
unholy desire for the world. It also brings the sanctified to look upon the 
sinful phase of the world as a culprit crucified for crime. They are as adverse 
to it as one would be adverse to a criminal condemned to be executed. They have 
not only died to all unnatural love they had for the world; but they now 
consider it as unlovable as an enemy of all good. But the world has not given up 
hope. Though its love has been spurned, yet it is hopeful of winning the 
affections again by fair means or foul: through natural desires of evil.

To refuse its advances in fashion and fame, honors and money is the wisdom of 
the sanctified. Let not the affections drop to the level of the world. Keep them 
set on things above, and not on things on the earth. "For ye are dead, and your 
life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then 
shall ye also appear with him in glory." Give all diligence to add to your faith 
temperance. 





Chapter 5 

PATIENCE 

"Giving all diligence, add to your faith ... patience."

Probably nothing has given quite so much concern to the sanctified as the matter 
of patience. Surely nothing is so important to holy living as patience. To add 
patience to faith is imperatively necessary to all who have entered the 
Christian race; for in their patience they possess their souls.

Before entering upon a discussion of patience we would first disabuse the mind 
of the sanctified of a false conception of this grace of patience. The want of a 
proper conception of the meaning of patience has resulted in many conscientious 
persons becoming unsettled in their faith. Under searching preaching they are 
likely to become stricken in conscience about what they judged to be a display 
of impatience under some trial and go to an altar to seek patience. They may be 
tempted to discredit their own experience of holiness of heart, and thus get 
into darkness and doubts. A word about what is not impatience in the sanctified 
will not be a word amiss.

There are a great many causes in sanctified persons which may result in moods, 
and emotions, and acts, that may be called impatience, but which are not the 
results of carnality, and are not impatience in any sense of the word. A careful 
discriminating between what is carnal and what is merely human, and thus 
physical and mental, will spare many holy persons much unrest of soul.

An overtaxed nervous system will produce moods and emotions, and even acts, 
which appear to the unsympathetic and critical to be impatience; yet these 
things are not caused by any moral lack; they are the results of the physical 
condition and not the spiritual.

When the body and mind are weary with the multitude of cares and duties which 
must be met with in everyday life, every muscle and nerve is crying out for rest 
and relief. In this condition one is not likely to feel an excess of religious 
joy. Under such circumstances the nagging of small children, the many questions 
that are asked, the many duties to be performed in the home and elsewhere, only 
add to the strain which is already at the breaking point. During such a trial of 
the physical, one may speak abruptly. He may act in haste. He may blindly 
blunder through a series of duties, and make it seem that everything has gone 
wrong that day. The day ends in a feeling of weariness in body and mind that is 
painful in the extreme. One feels that another such a day could never be lived 
through.

After a rest period this whole thing passes away. At its conclusion one may 
reflect back over the past events, and in so doing may be made a prey to the 
devil's accusations, and even be led to doubt the cleansing of the heart. Such 
may label the whole episode impatience. To do so is to become unsettled in 
faith, and injure the spiritual life.

The sameness and monotony of life is the most trying of all things on the body 
and mind. The home, and the business, and even the calling of the ministry, may 
at times seem like a prison. One may feel like an escape from such would be a 
bit of heaven on earth. This is weariness in the work, but not weariness of the 
work. Such a mood has a physical cause rather than a spiritual cause.

During this mood one may break into tears; he may feel like screaming; may 
desire to run away to some place he knows not where, just any place to escape 
the acute pain of mind and nerves. Under these conditions many things may be 
done that would seem to be incompatible with a holy heart. To the blind in mind 
and spiritual insight these are proof of sin. But to any candid mind the trouble 
is not moral, but mental and physical. Such a state of things may overtake the 
best of saints.

A grave danger lies in not properly appreciating persons who have such 
situations to contend with. It is very easy to misjudge one under these 
circumstances. Not all sanctified persons have similar home and business 
conditions with which to contend. It may appear to them that the work of grace 
in their own hearts has resulted in such restfulness of soul that they never 
appear ruffled or wanting in patience and poise. They may give the credit to 
their holiness rather than to the fact that they are not similarly tried.

It is beyond all question that the physical does affect the spiritual in every 
man. It affects it in many respects. Illness of body and mind can produce times 
of depression in spirit. Under such trials one can easily exaggerate his own 
faults and failures. This leads to self-condemnation and self-depreciation. One 
may believe in such times that the Lord is about to give him up because he has 
been so unfaithful and impatient under trial. He may even be driven to extreme 
fear that the unpardonable sin has been committed.

To sum up all the mistakes, blunders, quickness of word, hasty actions, 
failures, and a multitude of other things we could name, and credit them all to 
carnality, and label the whole list as impatience, will leave very few among the 
sanctified.

A careful and sensible examination of the heart proves that not one thing was 
done from an impure motive. Rather would the sanctified have died than sin 
against God or man. The whole was not a moral test. It was not a case of 
decision between right or wrong, sin or holiness, which confronted them. It was 
merely the physical and mental which they were doing their best to hold in 
reign, but which showed itself to their sorrow and embarrassment. This will be 
mastered by self-control, and proper care and rest No crisis at an altar can 
remedy it. It constitutes one of the duties of the sanctified to see to it that 
they learn the art of patient control of the physical, and not cast away their 
confidence if they fail to do so at all times.

The meaning of patience.

The meaning of this grace in the sanctified cannot be overrated. Its worth 
cannot be overestimated. To heed the admonition to give all diligence to add 
patience to faith is wisdom indeed.

Patience means endurance. It is to the saint in the race for the crown of life 
what endurance is to the athlete in a long-distance run. If the goal is reached, 
and if the runner is crowned with victory, he must not only run well, but he 
must endure to the end of the race.

Patience also means the ability to stand up under a load. Every child of God has 
a certain weight of responsibility resting on him. This responsibility is placed 
there by the Father, and it is proportioned to the strength of each child. 
Patience is that grace so necessary to the carrying of this load without 
fainting. Over mountains of difficulties, through valleys of sorrow, across 
plains of privation and want, each of His children bears his own burden without 
complaint, never once shirking the responsibility to escape the pain. It 
requires patience to do this. In such labor there is joy. Pain is pleasure to 
the patient.

Patience further means endurance of trial or temptation. In the very nature of 
things a holy people cannot escape trials of their faith, and temptations from 
the world and Satan. If God prefers to leave them in this world, He must permit 
them to be tempted. If He uses them in any service, He must expose them to 
dangers. This being true, He gives them the grace of patient endurance under 
trial, that He may use them to glorify himself. At the same time He has so 
willed that their trials shall work out for them an eternal weight of glory, and 
build their character into sturdy sainthood.

Sanctification results in the grace of patience in the believer. It makes a 
perfect patience possible because it removes sin from the soul. The carnal mind 
hinders a running with patience the race that is set before us. It is called 
"the sin which doth so easily beset us." That is, it is the sin which doth so 
closely environ us about as a close-fitting garment. Such a garment will impede 
progress, and must be laid aside. 


The carnal mind weakens the believer. It is the source of moral weakness, and 
with it no one can bear the load of responsibility which God imposes for His 
glory. But this sin is removed, so that the soul may bear the load imposed in 
the calling of God.

Thus in the act of sanctification the grace of patience is imparted, and a 
perfect patience becomes possible. But sanctification does not bring to the soul 
the results of patience. These can accrue to the sanctified only by letting 
patience have perfect work. Hence the exhortation to add patience to faith. That 
is, bring patience into use and great and gracious results will be obtained. 
Patience will be enlarged and the soul will be enriched, and God will be 
glorified.

The development of patience, and the use of patience as a grace. 

"Count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations; knowing this, that the 
trying of your faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect work, 
that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." By this scripture we see 
the value of letting patience have her perfect work. Such will result in a 
proving that we are "perfect and entire, wanting nothing." A patient endurance 
under trial is one of the best proofs of holiness that one can have. Trials will 
bring out phases of your own self that no preaching can ever reveal. Any lack of 
wisdom spiritually will surely be revealed under trial. Thus patience under 
trial can vindicate our profession of holiness. If under the test no unclean 
desires were felt, no stir of carnal anger, and no want of Christian virtues was 
evident, then patience has proved that you are "perfect and entire, wanting 
nothing." Let patience work unhindered by anything on your part by trying to 
escape the test, or by imposing our own wills against the will of God for us; 
and the soul will develop into sturdiness and strength that will bear up the 
crown of life when placed on the head. That crown is not for weaklings; it is 
for those who have grown strong under trying conditions of life. It is promised 
to all that love Him, but received only by those who endure temptation. "Blessed 
is the man that endureth." Those who patiently endure shall not be wanting in 
those qualities necessary to receive such blessedness in the crowning with life 
eternal. . Every quality of the sanctified soul will be benefited by letting 
patience have perfect work. One will be in every grace "perfect and entire, 
wanting nothing." 

"Tribulation worketh patience." 

"We glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and 
patience, experience."

Why should those who have had the love of God shed abroad in their hearts glory 
in tribulations? They know that tribulation worketh patience, and that patience 
worketh experience. Without the tribulations they would have had no results of 
patience, which is experience. Tribulation means a beating, and flailing, and 
tossing as in the threshing of grain by hand. It required this to separate the 
wheat from the chaff. Jesus said that in the world we should have tribulations. 
He made no provision for an escape from them; but He did provide a grace which 
would enable the soul to turn these to benefit. Patience under tribulation 
worketh experience, experience in matters that could be known only by passing 
through them. 

God teaches His saints some things by revelation. The Spirit takes the things of 
Christ and reveals them unto us. There are other things which He teaches them by 
experience. Nothing can possibly take the place of this method of instruction. 
But it requires patience on the part of the sanctified to endure the trials and 
tribulations by which God worketh experience to teach His people. Some of the 
richest additions to holy lives have been made by experience. During an 
affliction they learned something of the nature of God and His love and grace 
that they could have known in no other way. Happy and wise are those saints who, 
in the midst of trials and distresses, look to the Lord for the lesson He is 
wanting to teach them.

Nothing can instruct a holy people in the art of effective praying like an 
experience that tries them sorely. During a patient endurance of tribulations 
and distresses they turn to God in prayer. Such great things result from it that 
they prove how rich is the possibility of intercession. They waited patiently on 
the Lord, and He gave them the desire of their hearts. The same may be said of 
the development of faith. It becomes greater in its achievements because it 
advances from glory to glory with the development of a patient endurance that 
worketh experience.

Patience in the sanctified takes the form of a passive yieldedness to the known 
will of God, and a patient waiting for all further unfolding of His will in 
their behalf. 

"It is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure." 
This means that in the work of holiness the believer has become willing to do 
all he knows to be His good pleasure, and has willed in advance to do all that 
God shall ever reveal as His good pleasure. If it is His good pleasure for His 
child to suffer affliction of body, then such a one will acquiesce without 
murmuring, and patiently bear the affliction.

It has proved in many instances that an affliction patiently endured has 
enriched the life of the afflicted, and contributed untold wealth to the whole 
body of believers. Some of the rarest saints, whose ministry of song and hymn 
writing has blessed the world, were afflicted with blindness. God's ways may be 
inscrutable to the wicked, but to His saints the path in which He leads them is 
as a shining light, which shineth more and more unto the perfect day. In His own 
good time will He reveal the course each of His saints should take. They will 
find themselves in His will at all times, no matter what their estate may be, if 
they will wait patiently on Him to teach them the lessons they should learn.

Patience in well-doing. 

"Who will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who by patient 
continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal 
life." In view of the judgment of God we have need of adding patience to our 
faith. In that day an impartial God shall render unto all the reward for their 
deeds. Eternal life will be the reward of them who by patient continuance in 
well doing seek for immortal glory and honor.

Be not "weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not." 
He who hath sown to the Spirit shall reap life everlasting if he faint not, but 
await the harvest-time to come. 

No little concern is caused to the sanctified at times because they see so 
little fruit of their labors. The enemy often tempts them to discredit their 
faith because they can show so few results. A patient continuance in well-doing, 
even if they never see the desired returns, must be the determination of all 
holy persons. The very kind of service which they are performing may not be 
productive of immediate results. It may be years after death has claimed a 
faithful witness that the sowings of a lifetime may be harvested. The greatest 
services are not always performed by those who get the most credit in life. An 
evangelist may get all the credit for precipitating a great revival, while those 
who prayed weeks and years for such a divine visitation may be completely 
overlooked. Almost anyone can shake a tree of ripe fruit and gather a rich 
harvest, but it took months and years of hard and patient labor to bring the 
tree to the period of fruitfulness. Some reap where they have bestowed very 
little labor. Others labor long and patiently and never live to see the harvest. 
To be patient in this respect is true holiness.

Let each magnify his office. Let none discredit the calling. And let all 
continue faithfully in well-doing until a just Lord shall call them into His 
presence to render an account of their deeds. He shall render eternal life to 
all who have patiently continued in the doing of the work He set them to do. Be 
content with the calling He has honored you with. It is as great as you can be 
responsible for before the judgment.

Patience in waiting for the Lord. 

"The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting 
for Christ."

The Scriptures abound in exhortations to the sanctified to be patient unto the 
coming of the Lord. In their patience they possess their souls. Patience in this 
instance means that watchfulness so necessary to maintain a holy life. It 
implies all that is needful for an immediate translation at the coming of the 
Lord.

A patient waiting for the Lord's coming involves the sanctified in a diligent 
watchfulness in prayer, a faithfulness in service, and an unblamable life. "Be 
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless."

Our Lord gave the parable of the ten virgins to enforce this very fact. These 
persons are representatives of the company of those who are expecting the coming 
of the Lord. They have everything in common to a certain point. Five of them 
were foolish in that they made no provision against the delay of the bridegroom. 
If he had come earlier they would have been ready. They were not rejected 
because they had made no preparation. They were shut out because they did not 
endure unto his coming. The Holy Spirit supplies that oil of endurance that 
will keep the light burning as one waits for His return. But let all give 
careful heed to their lives and acts, that they keep the Spirit, that He be not 
grieved by their neglects and carelessness. A patient waiting for the Lord means 
to keep under the control of the Spirit, lest the light go out. There will be 
moments when it is needed sorely.

This day in the world's history is different from any other period of time. 
There was never a time when the moral standards of the world were so low. Sin is 
condoned today that was outlawed a few years ago. There is little or no 
conscience in any matter of divine law in this age. Iniquity doth abound. Jesus 
said, because iniquity should abound, the love of many would wax cold. He 
further charged His people to watch lest their hearts be overcharged with 
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and that day come upon 
them unawares. "Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before 
the Son of man."

Another appalling fact is the low ebb of spiritual life in the church world of 
the day. There is a departing from the faith the like of which has never been 
known before. The religious world still accords to Jesus the place of a great 
teacher. His ethical teachings are acknowledged to be without an equal among all 
founders of religions. But when it comes to the essential things, things 
necessary to save men from sin, these are denied and repudiated openly by many 
leaders in the church world. Many have no faith in the Blood as a necessity to 
their salvation. Holiness as an experience of heart and life is utterly 
discredited.

Those who would hold to these things so sacred to their hearts have never had 
such a battle in the history of the world to keep their faith in the midst of 
such a falling away. It requires a patience born of desperation to keep clean at 
any cost until He comes with the reward and crown.

It is very easy to follow the multitudes in a popular religion of works. It is 
easy to join in the social activities and frivolities of the apostate church. 
There is a religion of the age that is made easy for all. It has no persecution 
attached. It demands no self-crucifixion. One can have it and hold to the 
world's fashions and pleasures. Beware of its snare. It is death to all who are 
taken in its error.

Those who patiently wait for His coming are as pilgrims and strangers in the 
earth. Here they have no continuing city; they seek one to come. Their 
conversation is in heaven, from whence they look for the Lord. The lowest level 
of their living is as high as the requirements of the judgment. The bottom of 
their life is up to the top of their highest light. They do not sleep as do 
others. They watch and are sober. They are not children of the night, nor of the 
darkness, but of the day; children of light, who have put on the breastplate of 
faith and love, and for an 
helmet the hope of salvation. God has not appointed them to wrath, but to obtain 
salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. 

"Give all diligence to supply your faith with patience. For ye have need of 
patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the 
promise. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not 
tarry."

Let all those who love His appearing be zealous to maintain good works. Let them 
deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts; all live soberly and godly in this 
present world, "looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the 
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ." 





Chapter 6 

GODLINESS 

"Giving all diligence, add to your faith ... godliness."

Godliness means piety, devotion to God, worship, godlikeness in deportment. The 
latter meaning of the word includes all other uses of it. To be godly is to be 
Godlike -- Godlike in character and deportment. The sanctified must never lose 
sight of the fact that they are to be like God. Their conduct must be ordered so 
as never to be a discredit to this calling.

Let us first reconsider some facts relative to the work of holiness, that we may 
better understand the meaning of the practice of holiness. A man is not 
incapacitated to be like God morally and spiritually. The very facts of his 
creation show this to be true. God made man in His own moral image in the 
beginning. The entrance of sin and the fall of man did not incapacitate the race 
from ever becoming, in the new creation in Christ, like God. "He hath chosen us 
in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without 
blame before him in love." "Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be 
conformed to the image of his Son." God predetermined character for redeemed 
man. That character was to be like the Son. Now likeness to God does not mean 
equality. No human being can be equal to God in that he possesses His 
attributes. But likeness does mean a likeness to Him in holiness. He is sinless; 
so also are His people sinless. If He is holy, so also are they holy who are to 
be with Him, and behold His glory.

That which a holy people show in godliness is a manifestation of their nature, 
exactly as God manifests His nature. God has no moral qualities and virtues 
which cannot be duplicated in a holy man. We know God is what He is because of 
what He does. We know a man is what he is, whether holy or unholy, by what he 
does. To be godlike in deeds and actions, will and purposes, is the proof of 
holiness. But the fact of holiness is demonstrated by the life one lives. Yet 
the duty of a sanctified man is not to prove that he is holy any more than it is 
the duty of a man to prove he is alive. If he lives, all know it who see him; 
his task is to be living for something. If a man is pure, all will see it 
without his proving it to them. The one task of such a man is to be holy for a 
purpose. A holy person is to mean something to the world of mankind, and to the 
God he serves. What the world needs is not a laboratory proof of piety, but a 
living, everyday, practical use of it. Hence godliness is to be added to faith 
as a necessary working principle.

Godliness added to faith.

Godliness is added to faith in the practical demonstration of all Christian 
virtues. It is the bringing of these virtues into use in everyday life. It is 
acting and being godlike.

Forgiveness is one of these traits of godlikeness. We are to have the spirit of 
forgiveness even as Christ possessed it. Demands will be made upon this moral 
trait, even as they were made upon the compassion of our Lord.

The sanctified must be ever ready to forgive any offense, either against them or 
against the Church or against God. This spirit of forgiveness must work easily, 
readily, and without effort, no matter what the offense may be, nor how often it 
has been committed. If a brother be so fickle as to sin against us seventy times 
in a day, at the seventieth offense we must as readily and frankly forgive as at 
the first. Such must be this virtue in quality that one will not even be 
gratified when the erring brother or sister must confess his or her sin. He does 
not feel like saying, "I told you so." Such compassion and pity possess him that 
he can feel no pleasure in the other's humiliation. Such a spirit of forgiveness 
would not desire the confession as a condition if it were not for the good of 
the offender. The contrition of an offending brother affords no pleasure to a 
holy man to boast in.

That godliness, as manifested in the spirit of forgiveness, is in much demand in 
the daily life of the sanctified, none can gainsay. The personal safety of every 
holy person depends on this trait of character being supplied to his faith.

Sanctification does not render anyone immune to insult. It does not destroy the 
sensibilities of the soul so that it does not feel hurt when one is wronged. A 
holy God can be insulted. He can be hurt and grieved. For one who is sanctified 
to feel the sting of slander is not carnal. Yet such a one must keep this from 
injuring him by the constant flow of the heart stream of forgiveness. If any 
have grounds of complaint against another, he is to forgive even as Christ hath 
forgiven him. Hot tears may fall as a result of the wounded feelings, but the 
sweet spirit of forgiveness looks up to God while the pain is the severest and 
prays, "Father, forgive them; they know not what they do." This is godliness 
added to faith.

So delicate are the relations between a holy God and a holy man that these 
relations may be severed by overlooking the practice of godliness in 
forgiveness. This may seem exaggerated; nevertheless, it is true. Worship is 
forbidden to those who bring their gift to the altar and remember their brother 
hath ought against them. They must leave the gift and be reconciled before God 
will accept their worship. The shortest route to a backslider's grave is to fail 
to be godlike and forgive. The want of this practical virtue will close the 
heavens against prayer, and hide the face of God from the soul. "If ye do these 
things, ye shall never fall," say the Scriptures. Give diligence to be godly. 
Supplying faith with this holy trait will make the calling and election sure.

Forbearance is another mark of godliness which must be added to faith. This 
grace in the sanctified must be coupled with that of forgiveness. By forbearance 
is meant that grace of a holy heart which endures and forbears with the 
infirmities and faults of others. The difference between forgiveness and 
forbearance is this: Forgiveness grants a clean record to all persons who sin 
against us willfully or otherwise. Forbearance is that which bears with others 
who do things that hurt us, or injure the Church, because they do not know any 
better. They do these things for want of understanding in spiritual things.

If God required a hundred per cent efficiency in our service, who among the 
saints could measure up? Not one. No matter how holy these may be, they are not 
perfect in understanding; neither are they without infirmities. God forbears 
with His people in many things that they do which are not up to the perfect 
standard, because they did the best they could. They knew no more to do. They 
had no better sense. The same godlike attitude must be taken by all holy persons 
toward one another. Forgive one another's debts when there is nothing with which 
to pay.

Some zealous persons become very narrow in their religious life. They become 
very negative in that they restrict themselves in dress and social relations 
almost to the point of fanaticism. This is done in ignorance, and not because of 
sin. They are to be borne with until they have time to get over their 
misconception. Let all others be careful not to flay them and criticize them. 
Rather, forbear with them. Some are naturally, or so it seems, weak in faith. 
It is so hard for them to get established! They become chronic doubters and 
constant seekers. Many of this class live on their emotions too much. When they 
are depressed they are down. They constitute a trial to all the established 
saints. If a class among us needs to have forbearance, these do. To support the 
weak becomes the life of holiness. To patiently forbear with them is godliness. 
The value of practical godliness in this respect cannot be overestimated. There 
passes not a day but that a sanctified person finds need of this virtue. The 
spiritual blindness of those around us could cause us no end of trouble if this 
grace to forbear with them were not at hand.

Even ministers can lose control of themselves, and denounce the wicked, and club 
the saints in a manner unbecoming of holiness, because they fail patiently to 
forbear with such persons. What we may clearly see may not be seen by others to 
whom we minister. To so presume, and become combative, and vehement, and 
denunciatory, is a grave error of mind. To forbear with them, and wait on God to 
convince and convict, is the better way. This will display godliness.

Godliness is added to faith by maintaining unity. 

"Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace." Mark you 
the word "endeavouring." Note the personal responsibility that rests upon a 
Spirit-filled and Spirit-sealed people. This will be walking worthy of the 
vocation to which they are called. "In all lowliness and meekness, with 
longsuffering, forbearing one another in love."

The lack of unity among the believers may not be due to carnality in every 
instance. It may be caused by a lack of endeavor to preserve the unity of the 
whole body at the cost and sacrifice of the opinions and ambitions of the 
individual. There is a holy endeavor to be put forth by all holy persons to 
preserve this unity at any sacrifice.

Holiness does not make all persons see exactly alike. It does not guarantee 
against a difference of opinions, nor a conflict of wills. Matters that relate 
to the interest of the church may be viewed from various viewpoints. The general 
interests of all cover a vast scope. One person may not see the whole thing at 
once. Such a one may have plans and motives that are pure, yet impractical. Such 
situations often arise where these conditions prevail. A display of real 
godliness that is beautiful is shown when one can table his plans, take defeat 
gracefully and sweetly, waive all rights in favor of the common good of all The 
good of the whole unit is always to be sought. It is always above the private 
rights of any individual. Let none insist on having his way or say. Clamor is 
to be laid aside as being inconsistent with true holiness.

It is a display of godliness when one can back out, withdraw with love and 
grace, and feel sweet about it. To be headstrong is not the best way to add 
godliness. A sanctified will is a strong will, but not too strong to bend w
ithout breaking. Proper tempering by holy fire will result in a yielding will, 
which does not crumble and break when it must bow in humble deference to the 
wills of others.

Godliness is exemplified by those who are easily entreated. They can be moved 
from their position, and adapt themselves to other ways which make for the 
highest interest of all concerned. 

There is no problem of the church that cannot be solved if this godlike endeavor 
is practiced by all. A division in the body of believers would be utterly 
impossible under such practice of godliness. We read of the Early Church that 
the "multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither 
said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but 
they had all things common." Here is unity. A multitude as one person. Every 
opinion, every ambition, every will, merged into the unit.

Godliness is added to faith by each esteeming others better than themselves. 

"Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of 
others. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus." It was this 
esteeming others better than himself that resulted in the sacrifice of Christ 
for the world's redemption. To seek the welfare of others, rather than seek your 
own interests, is to be like the Christ. He could have appeared in His glory, 
rather than empty himself, and be made of no reputation. But He thought it not 
the thing to be seized as the prize to appear in His glory. If He had done so, 
he would have dazzled and bewildered the world with His splendor, but He could 
not have saved them from sin. But to save others, himself he could not save. He 
esteemed others better than himself. This is the mind of Christ which is to be 
in every holy man. To carry out this into practice is the very essence of 
godliness.

Every sanctified person has certain rights. It is proper and fit that these 
rights should be recognized by all But not all persons recognize these rights 
and privileges. They trample on our feelings. They ignore our claims; they even 
fail to appreciate our talents. To be godlike let the sanctified feel that in 
the helping of others their own rights are not to be considered. To help others 
often means to sacrifice the feelings to be trampled upon. A holy person is 
willing to be a "nobody" if it will help another. If it would help another for 
such to eat 110 meat, then eat no more meat as long as you live. Do this in the 
spirit in which Paul did it, and not in any sense to cater to religious 
fanatics. Extremes are to be avoided. Jesus would not do some things merely to 
meet the demands of cranks in ritualism.

But there are many sacrifices which can be made that will result in helping 
others, which it is a show of godliness to make. The extra miles can be gone; 
it will be godlike to go. The other cheek can be turned; the results will 
compensate for the pain. The cup of sacrifice for others must be emptied by 
those who would do the will of God. The contents of that cup are made up of the 
home, the family, the comforts of life, the needs of the body, the name and the 
reputation, the feelings and the affections. All these are sacrificed in behalf 
of the happiness of others. The good of others comes first before the personal 
interest, comforts, and pleasure of your own, even though all be yours by right. 
A holy man is willing to be unnoticed, unappreciated, unrecognized, if it will 
redound to the salvation of others.

Godliness is sacrificial in behalf of both God and mankind. That is not 
godliness that gives up sinful things. It is godliness to give up what is 
rightfully ours, things which we could have and enjoy, and yet get to heaven. 
But if sacrificed for the sake of others it is godlikeness. By our doing this, 
godliness is added to faith; the life is enriched; and the whole work of God 
prospers.

Chapter 7 

BROTHERLY KINDNESS 

"Giving all diligence, add to your faith ... brotherly kindness."

Brotherly kindness is the kindness of kinship. It is that brotherly love 
peculiar to the children of God. It is a fruit of holiness. It has that faculty 
of spiritual insight which sees the worth, value, and good qualities that lie 
beneath the surface of the rough exterior of a redeemed soul.

Brotherly kindness possesses a kindred sympathy with each member of the body of 
Christ. It rejoices with them that do rejoice, and weeps with them that weep. It 
has that rare quality of affection which can put itself in the other brother's 
place and from his viewpoint see things that affect him. It can enter into a 
brother's privations, wants, sacrifices, sufferings, afflictions, and 
distresses, and help such a brother carry his load with greater ease.

To see this fruit of holiness in practice is to witness the beauty of holiness 
with which the Lord is worshipped. Surely nothing is so needful among the people 
of the Lord as this grace of brotherly kindness.

The redeemed family of God is made up of persons out of every nation, kindred, 
people, and tongue under heaven. They represent all walks of life, every stratum 
of society, and are taken from all classes of the human race. There are no two 
of them exactly alike in every respect. They are all blood-washed but vastly 
different in many other ways. Their diversified gifts, manners, lives, 
temperaments, spirits, and mental conditions cause a peculiar situation that 
only brotherly love can meet with fortitude. The eccentricities of this mixed 
company create a problem, the solution of which is possible only by love.

Holiness has made of all these persons one body in Christ. It has made them 
members one of another. Christ is the head: "From whom the whole body fitly 
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to 
the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body 
unto the edifying of itself in love."

But brotherly love is the bond of perfectness which keeps the whole body intact, 
and supplies each member with the proper lubricant to prevent friction.

Brotherly kindness is the only thing at the command of a holy person that can be 
brought into use, and by so doing can assure a blameless life among this mixed 
multitude of personalities. It is imperatively necessary to every man's eternal 
well-being that he add brotherly kindness to his faith. Without the practice of 
this grace such a one can never live a holy life.

The lowest level of brotherly love is as high as the love of Jesus Christ "A new 
commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that 
ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, 
if ye have love one to another."

The standard is Christ's love: "As I have loved you." Brotherly kindness must 
ever be kept on this level. It must consider every other brother as Jesus Christ 
considers him. The same compassionate love which Christ shows must be also shown 
by every act, word, and deed. The proof of the indwelling of God in the 
sanctified is by their love for the brethren. "If we love one another, God 
dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us." The consummation of the divine 
affection was the gift of Himself to us. The proof of this is in the love we 
have for one another. Love becomes the very essence of the nature of the 
sanctified, even as it is the essence of the nature of God. If it is in the 
nature of God to love all men, so also is it within the new man's nature, who is 
a creation after the image of God, to love all men, especially the family of 
God.

Brotherly love being so essential to the life of holiness, it is only fitting 
that we specify some ways in which it is expressed. Let us keep in mind that 
this grace is a fruit of holiness. It is pure and perfect in that it is without 
any mixture of sin. But this does not imply that it cannot be developed and 
intensified. It can be so developed that it will abound yet more and more in all 
wisdom and spiritual understanding. Furthermore, we are unwilling to credit 
every unbrotherly act so often seen among the brethren as being the result of 
carnality. Sanctified persons can improve in their outward love -- life by 
knowing and learning how to express love toward one another more perfectly. May 
the Lord give us all understanding!

Brotherly love is sacrificial.

This does not mean that it can become vicarious in its sacrifice. It cannot 
atone for the sins of any person. That can be done only by the Christ, who loved 
us and gave himself to be the propitiation for our sins and the sins of the 
whole world. But there is a love that lays down the life for the brethren. 
"Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us: and 
we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren."

There are a great many ways in which one may lay down his life for the brethren. 
One of these, as John shows it, is to minister to a brother in temporal affairs 
when it is seen he hath need. To have this world's good and see the brother has 
need, and shut up the heart of compassion from him is not consistent with 
brotherly love. To love in deed and in truth is to make sacrifices in giving -- 
not gifts that come out of a abundance, but those that come like the mite of the 
widow, who gave her living; to do without some things in order that some needy 
brother may have relief.

Such sacrificial love on the part of the Church as a whole will forever solve 
the financial problem of that institution. Loving in word and in tongue is not 
sufficient. It must take the active form of deed and in truth. "Hereby we know 
that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him." If in these 
matters our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. Nothing 
so enhances the value of holiness as the sacrificial love that lays down the 
life for the brethren. Nothing gives quite so much pleasure to the sanctified 
as the practice of this grace of love.

Brotherly kindness restores the brother overtaken in a fault. 

"If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one 
in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear 
ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ." 

These instructions are explicit. The duties of the brethren are clearly stated. 
Love must extend a helping hand to the fallen one, and restore him to his place 
in the body.

The picture is that of a member of the body which has been thrown out of joint. 
The violence of the temptation has dislocated the member. Such a one was 
overtaken, whether by subtlety or by storm. The result of the attack was to pull 
him out of joint and fellowship. Brotherly love and kindness must now restore 
this one to his place, so he may properly function in the whole body. How 
tender, then, must be the touch of the hand of love to handle such a sore member 
of the body! Love is such that the whole body feels the acute pain.

Would to God this grace were more in evidence! How few would be the backsliders 
who would be left to perish with no hand of love outstretched to help them 
recover themselves out of the snare of the enemy!

Holiness means more in this case than a complacent enjoyment of a blessing. It 
hurries to the rescue of those who have been swept from their moorings by the 
wiles of the devil. It seeks with a Christlike love those who have been enticed 
from the path of virtue by the cunning craftiness of men who lie in wait to 
deceive.

Various things may result in a brother's being overtaken in a fault. Men and 
women have gone down through the vilest sins, and through the most subtle 
errors. Anywhere between the extremes of gross evil and plausible errors one is 
liable to be overtaken in a fault.

Each offense demands a tactful show of kindness and wisdom that taxes the 
ingenuity of the sanctified. But love will find a way, and prove equal to the 
occasion. To recover a brother who has gone down in gross sensuality and 
recover another from extreme fanaticism requires different phases of 
loving-kindness. One feels the enormity of his sin, and is often so overwhelmed 
with shame that he is ever discouraged from even trying to return to God. The 
other feels no guilt, and probably believes everyone else is wrong who does not 
see as he sees. No fixed rule can be given as to the methods to employ in 
dealing with them. It is simply given in order to emphasize a phase of brotherly 
kindness often overlooked. To restore such a one in the proper spirit, put 
yourself in his place and try to feel as he does. What love and kindness would 
you want?

Again, brotherly kindness must make the restored brother feel that he is really 
restored. That is, he must be made to feel that he stands as though he had never 
sinned. Not the slightest difference must ever be made to appear in 
fellowshipping him. We recall an instance where two preachers met on the same 
camp-meeting platform as engaged workers. One of these men had been recently 
recovered from a fallen state. His sin had been terrible. But he had given every 
evidence of having been reclaimed and sanctified since that fall. The other 
brother refused to sit on the same platform with him. This is not a show of 
brotherly love and kindness. Consider thyself, lest thou be tempted to display 
such a want of this grace. Help bear the other brother's burden, and so fulfill 
the royal law, "Thou shalt love thy brother as thyself."

Brotherly kindness is without dissimulation. 

"Let love be without dissimulation." That is, let love be pure. Never permit it 
to appear otherwise in any acts of life. "Abhor that which is evil." Let love be 
so refined as to be utterly adverse to anything evil.

The plain inference is that it becometh the duty of a holy people to be refined 
lovers of one another. Brotherly love is to move on the highest plane of action, 
never stooping to that which is little and small. It must show consideration for 
others. Their feelings, their interests, their reputations, are highly 
respected. Abhor any show of disrespect. Refuse even to criticize when it might 
be done in truth. Even telling the truth on some brother may do him an 
irreparable injustice, and evil may result.

The family of God is comparable to the family life of a man. The members of the 
family are all different. They have different likes and dislikes. They have 
their disagreements as well as they have their agreements. They make many 
mistakes, and have innumerable faults. It requires time, and patience, and much 
love to get so adjusted to one another as not to sever relations. It takes pure 
love to aid in the things that grate on the nerves, and wear on the dispositions 
of one another. Here is where the kindness of kinship comes in. Even if a family 
does suffer these things among themselves, they do not tell it all over the 
neighborhood. It is none of the neighbors' business to know it. It does not 
concern them. To tell it will only add embarrassment to the other members. Love 
that is love keeps all this at home.

So also is this the right spirit of brotherly love that is kept pure. It never 
relates the many faults and failures of the brethren to the ears of the wicked. 
It is not for them to know. It is a family affair that is kept in the privacy of 
the family. Holiness is love acting holy in that it takes no pleasure in 
speaking of the faults and failings of the brothers of the family of God. It 
places the mantle of charity over the whole family, looks for the best in each, 
and prays over the faults of all.

After sanctification, what? Here is something that can be added which will 
assure an abundant entrance into the everlasting Kingdom. Holiness supplies the 
will to do this, and the motive; but it is the duty of every sanctified person 
to give all diligence to add it to his faith as a necessary precaution against a 
moral collapse resulting from brotherly love not being kept pure in all the 
demands made upon it. To keep love pure and unsullied while one lives among all 
the classes of persons that constitute the visible Church demands watchfulness 
over every member of the body, every faculty of the mind, and every volition of 
the will. To maintain spiritual existence and live a blameless life, this must 
be done.

Accord no treatment to your brother that you would not accord to your Christ. 
Love him despite his faults, as the Christ loves you despite your faults. 
Mention not his failings and judge not his motives; he must stand before the 
Judge even as you must stand. Let your love overflow all human bounds. Let it 
cover all human infirmities and sins with the mantle of pity. It will inundate 
the lowlands of human life like a flood, covering the unsightly snags with the 
waters of a placid lake. It will smile back to God while He pours out the 
torrential rains of His grace upon your soul to keep you always at flood stage. 
Let love be pure. Cleave to the good in all the brotherhood of saints. By so 
doing you shall add brotherly kindness to your faith. 





Chapter 8 

CHARITY 

"Giving all diligence, add to your faith ... charity."

Love is the very essence of the religion of Jesus Christ. A love which prompts 
all motives, regulates every desire and ambition, and directs the course of 
living out a holy life, fulfills the law of God. A sanctified man is constrained 
by love; he is filled with love and dwells in love. Holiness of heart has 
resulted in the man having the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy 
Ghost, which is given unto him. This love resides at the fountainhead of the 
issues of his life. It transfigures him into the likeness of Him who was the 
very embodiment of divine love.

Charity in the New Testament means much more than the common usage of that word 
implies in the parlance of nominal Christianity of today. It means that the pure 
love of God is clothed with the human personality. A sanctified man becomes in a 
very true sense the love of God incarnate. The love of God clothed with the 
personality of Jesus, the Son of Man, has been multiplied by the whole 
sanctified Church. The members of that holy company have had love made perfect 
in them, and because of that, "As he is, so are we in this world."

This is the lowest standard of holiness anyone may hope to measure by who 
properly understands the meaning of this experience. The fruit of holiness is 
charity in all its ramifications. There is no phase of life that it does not 
touch. It purifies the motive of true worship; it intensifies the spirit of 
acceptable service; and maintains an unreprovable life before God.

The personal responsibility enjoined upon the sanctified to give all diligence 
to supply their faith with charity cannot be overemphasized. Their duty is to 
exemplify it at all times, and under all conditions, and in all places. 
Furthermore, they are not only to be examples of it, but they are to put it to 
the most practical uses in this world.. To do this is one of the duties that 
follow after holiness has been received.

Charity out of a pure heart. 

"Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart." Through charity 
which proceeds from a pure heart the whole law of God revealed in the gospel can 
be fulfilled. All that both the old and the new covenants enjoin can be lived 
out through love which comes out of a pure heart. To swerve from this, as some 
did, will mean to make shipwreck of faith.

Love out of a pure heart expresses itself in three directions: It is first 
Godward, then brotherward, and worldward.

Love toward God is pre-eminently first, and above any and all other phases of 
love. Within the human affectionate nature is a sacred center or place which is 
opened by the act of the will to admit the indwelling Christ, who, in the person 
of the Holy Spirit, is God's love-gift to the soul. All persons and things which 
have dwelt in this place in the heart are taken out. Father, mother, sister, 
brother, wife, children, houses and lands, yea, even the very self, all are 
taken out of the first place in the affections. That place is given to God. He 
comes before all these persons and things ever afterward. This constitutes the 
greatest possible gift that anyone can make to God. He has done his best when 
such a gift is made.

When this has been done, then God's love moves to the highest possible plane of 
action, and He gives himself to the soul. These two affections meet in redeeming 
grace in the heart of a man and consummate that union which exists when we dwell 
in Him and He in us, and love is made perfect. This is the state of the 
sanctified.

Now this first love toward God must ever be held to this level. The sanctified 
must ever keep their love for God at this point. We do know that true love 
between man and woman reaches its highest point when they have given themselves 
to each other to form wedlock where the twain become one flesh. If they are to 
continue throughout life in happiness, their love must be held at this highest 
point always. It must never give place to any other person or thing. All persons 
and all things are kept in a lesser place in the affections.

These same facts are true with respect to that relationship which exists between 
the sanctified and their Lord. They are not only to give themselves to Him in 
love, but they must ever keep Him fixed in their affections throughout all the 
days of their life. If nothing can separate us from the love of God, because God 
will not permit anything to intrude in the place He has given in His heart to 
His people, then let His people see to it that nothing shall separate Him from 
their love.

If the sanctified will carry this determination into all life, they will know 
the meaning of what is implied in the exhortation to give all diligence to add 
love to faith.

Love which expresses itself brotherward we have treated on in a preceding 
chapter. We advance to that phase of love which is expressed worldward by the 
sanctified.

Love is twofold in its nature. There is compassionate love and there is 
pleasurable love. The latter means that phase of love which loves others with 
the love of pleasure. It delights in them because they are lovable in ways and 
character.

But compassionate love is that kind which loves with the love of pity. It loves 
the person, but not that person's ways. It is this kind of love with which God 
loved the world, and which resulted in the gift of His Son to die for them. "God 
commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died 
for us." But God does not love the world of sinful men with the love of 
pleasure. It is the love of pity and compassion which He has for sinners. This 
is the kind of love which His people have for sinners in this world. Holiness 
results in a heart of compassion for lost men. It can never be holiness and be 
indifferent and self-contented while the world rots on the rim of ruin. Love 
feels it is debtor to all men to acquaint them with the good news of salvation. 
It takes advantage of every opportunity to witness for Christ It identifies 
itself with Christ in this respect, that it acknowledges Him before all men as 
the Saviour of the world.

The want of compassionate love toward the world is too often seen among 
professors of holiness. Many of them seem to be bent on the enjoyment of their 
own experience, but have little regard for those who are in darkness. The loss 
of this love indicates the loss of that knowledge of holiness. It savors of an 
ease in Zion which has no tears to shed over the lost multitudes of earth.

It is too often the truth that little burden is carried; prayers are without 
fervency, and personal work is lacking, and the compassionate love is wanting. 
This love is fervent when the heart is holy. Let every sanctified person be 
diligent to keep this love added to faith. To lose the ministry of 
reconciliation means death to the soul.

There is no amount of exhortation, urging, appealing, threatening, or promises 
that can produce this compassion for a lost world which the Church so much 
needs. It results from a holy heart, Spirit-filled, and love constrained. Love 
for sinners that pities their plight, sympathizes with their condition, and 
pours itself out to save them is something that must be kept alive in the heart 
by keeping close to God and imbibing the Spirit of the Master. Love that is pure 
results in fervency of spirit serving the Lord. A holy man will dry up in his 
soul if he fails to keep his love for a lost world to the highest pitch, and put 
it into everyday use by prayer and work.

Charity only gives value to good works. 

"Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I 
am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of 
prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all 
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And 
though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be 
burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing."

The message of the Spirit to the Ephesian church as recorded in Revelation 
corroborates these words of Paul. With all they had done and were doing, none of 
their works were of value because they had left their first love. They had 
fallen below the pre-eminent affection which only could make their works 
acceptable before God.

Charity must be added to all works performed for the Lord, because love is the 
only true spirit of holy service. To do anything for any other reason except 
love is to be rejected of the Lord. No good works are to be done in order to 
merit salvation. They proceed from the love which has resulted from salvation.

The man who tithes his income because it is his duty merely, or because he fears 
not to do it, or because he wants the Lord to prosper him for so doing, does so 
with the wrong motive. If he tithes out of pure love for God and His cause, his 
works receive eternal value. To preach because of a sense of duty, or for money, 
fame, or favor, is not the spirit of love. Preaching is made a joyful service 
and an honorable calling because of the love which one has for God and men.

If love does not actuate the motives of service, one becomes a hireling. Such 
serve for wages and not because they love either God or the persons served. Love 
bears with fortitude all weariness in service. It asks for no credit or 
commendation; it only asks to be privileged to serve. Love never measures just 
the amount to be done in order to ease the conscience; it does all it possibly 
can, at all times, always. 

It is very easy to become a great worker, yet be a poor lover. Fervent love 
enhances the value of zealous service. Many retain their standard of works after 
they have lost their first love. They may substitute good works for love and 
appease the cry of the heart for the satisfaction which they lost when they 
ceased to be ardent lovers.

Love, the very essence of holiness, may be lost like salt may lose its savor. 
That person who has sustained such a loss may for years maintain good works, be 
faithful and loyal to obligations, and otherwise retain the standard of the 
works of holiness, and the heart be wanting in the affection which once gave so 
much joy and satisfaction. Such a one will continue to work from the sense of 
duty, though the soul is parched and dry, and an insatiable thirst for the 
blessing of God torments him day and night. Everything done seems so empty and 
devoid of real pleasure in service. Such will find himself groaning in prayer 
for God to do something for him that will break up the drought of soul and make 
the labors more delightful.

Without charity added to faith all that is done profiteth nothing. Holiness that 
is lived out through love in the performance of all works is true holiness; for 
love gives value to all its deeds. A breakdown in love results in formalism in 
service. Service without love is form without power. Keeping love fervent for 
Christ is the secret of holy service replete with joy and contentment.

Offering up the heart daily in love-making to Christ is the secret of 
maintaining holiness at the highest point of efficient service. Such as do this 
will always have their testimony that they please God. They will walk with God 
without a break all the days of their life, in holiness and righteousness before 
Him.

Charity as a preventive.

Love in possession of the heart keeps it closed to all undesirables. It permits 
no intrusions into its sacred precincts. It stands guard at every entrance of 
the soul. Love is the bond of perfectness. It holds together all the faculties, 
and all desires of mind and body, and prevents them from going beyond certain 
fixed bounds. It will not behave itself unseemly in any manner. It keeps the 
whole spiritual life and being in perfect poise. It prevents excesses and 
lapses. All that is unbecoming it forbids, and all that is becoming it 
recommends.

Love in the sanctified governs the will. Those who love with pure love refrain 
from grieving the persons whom they love. All volitions are regulated by their 
love. Those who love God cannot sin-not because their will is destroyed, but 
because they are prevented by love. Hence all things which are incompatible to 
the sanctified life will be prevented by the adding of charity to their faith. 
Keeping love at full tide will be the greatest safeguard a holy man can have.

Love will prevent envy. One needs to understand the nature of envy in order to 
safeguard against its ever returning in the soul that has been sanctified.

Envy is the result of dissatisfaction with present conditions, situations, and 
possessions, when compared with the same things in others. One is sorely tempted 
to complain of his lot after he sees how fortune has smiled on someone else who 
he knows is no more deserving than he. Sickness, poverty, misfortune may have 
been the portion he has received; while others around him may be more favored, 
and none of these things have befallen them. Seeing this, it is easy to grow 
restive and complaining, which will surely open the way for the devil to plant 
the seed of envy in the heart.

Love, that in honor prefers one another, must come to the rescue. It must 
command the will, the body, and the mind. Love will look up to a wise God and 
thank Him for His blessings received, and rejoice that He has seen fit to give 
to others what He denies to us. Can love do this? It can without doubt do this 
in all sincerity. This is the attitude of all who possess it.

If the love one has for a family can do this, why not the love one has for God? 
Suppose the choice is given to select any member of the family to suffer 
affliction? What would decide the choice? Would not love suffer rather than have 
another suffer while it escapes? Love immediately sacrifices itself in place of 
the person which it loves. This is love, in honor preferring one another. Love 
in the sanctified takes this position toward the honors which God may see fit to 
give to His people. It takes this attitude in sufferings and sacrifices to be 
made. "Take me," says love, "crucify me, but let these alone."

The sanctified do well to guard at this point. They must give all diligence to 
add love to faith, and bring it into play when such demands are made upon them 
in the course of a holy life.

Again, love prevents provocation. It does not prevent the causes of provocation, 
but it is not provoked when these arise. Carnal anger is never evidenced in the 
sanctified. It is put off with the old man. A sanctified person has within him 
the same human traits which exploded into anger when in sin. These are resident 
within, and are purified and placed under the control of the will, which in 
turn is governed by love. Sanctification has not removed from the soul that 
which sin once controlled; only the sin is removed. The same things which once 
provoked to anger are met with from without by all holy persons, but the same 
conditions do not exist within them. Love meets those provoking persons and 
situations with fortitude, and holds the will and emotions steady until the 
storm be passed. Love does not get provoked; it retains its nature. It would
 cease to be love if it became anger.

Another point to guard in adding charity to faith is that of "righteous 
indignation." By this covering some have clothed their lack of charity. A 
sanctified individual is not utterly blind to the sins and gross injustices of 
this age of the world. The wicked do prosper and bring wicked devices to pass. 
But the admonition is to "Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil." To be angry 
and sin not is possible, if the anger is the kind God has toward sin. But man is 
so frail and weak at his best that he is admonished not to let the sun go down 
upon his wrath. Better not keep it in the house overnight. Vehemence does not 
become charity.

Charity is not compromising in its make-up. one cannot love God and side with 
His enemies also. Yet to break out in bitter denunciations will only injure the 
cause of holiness, and react with no good effects on the soul.

Charity abides. 

Love is the one enduring quality; it hath never an end. It never ceases to be 
useful and necessary in time or eternity. It bears all things. It never breaks 
down under the load which it hath consented to bear. It believeth all things; 
for it knows whom it hath believed, and is persuaded that He is able to keep 
that which hath been committed to His care against that day. It hopeth all 
things, because it knows there is no disappointment awaiting the trusting soul. 
Faithful is He who hath promised; He cannot deny himself.

Ah unfailing love in man must meet the unfailing love of God. These two become 
one in the unity of redemption. Nothing can separate the redeemed from His love, 
for it abides. Nothing must separate Him from their love; it must abide. This 
will create a union which cannot be broken. It forms a relation which cannot be 
severed. Heaven and earth may pass away, but love abides. The eternal Son shall 
fold up the heavens like a vesture, and they shall be changed. He shall shake 
the earth until the oceans spill oyer their sides, and the mountains skip like 
lambs at play. He shall shake heaven until it departs like a scroll when rolled 
together. He shall cause the moon to turn to blood, and the stars to fall as the 
fig tree casteth her untimely fruit when she is shaken of a mighty wind. With a 
voice which compasses the earth like a terrible thunder, He shall awaken the 
dead, startle the living, and terrify the wicked, as He summons both small and 
great into final judgment. 

But we have received a kingdom which cannot be moved. "Now abideth faith, hope, 
charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity." 

O Love that will not let me go, 
I rest my weary soul in Thee; 
I give Thee back the life I owe, 
That in Thine ocean depths its flow 
May richer, fuller be.

O Light that followest all my way, 
I yield my flickering torch to Thee; 
My heart restores its borrowed ray, 
That in Thy sunshine's glow its day 
May brighter, fairer be. 

O Joy that seekest me through pain, 
I cannot close my heart to Thee; 
I trace the rainbow through the rain, 
And feel the promise is not vain 
That morn shall tearless be.

O Cross that liftest up my head, 
I dare not ask to fly from Thee; 
I lay in dust life's glory dead, 
And from the ground there blossoms red 
Life that shall endless be. 





Chapter 9 

ENTRANCE INTO THE EVERLASTING KINGDOM

Holiness is a fitness. It capacitates one spiritually to fellowship with a holy 
God and holy beings. When the Scriptures say, "Without holiness no man shall see 
the Lord," they have not stated this as an arbitrary decree; this is a fixed 
fact in the very nature of things. The dead cannot fellowship the living. The 
unholy cannot fellowship the holy. These are separated by a law that in the 
nature of things creates a great gulf between them, across which neither can 
pass. The blind cannot appreciate by sight the colors of the rainbow. The deaf 
cannot derive pleasure from the sound of music. These are wanting in that which 
makes such enjoyments possible.

God is a Spirit, pure in love, pure in all His virtues and graces as revealed in 
redemption. To enjoy Him one must be transformed into a likeness to all He is. 
Sin has nothing in common with God. Sin in the soul renders that soul incapable 
of eternal association with God.

Holiness is life. God is eternal in life. Only the living can fellowship with the 
living. Sin is death. It is utterly impossible to harmonize these two conditions. 
Entrance into the everlasting Kingdom is by the gate of abundant life. Jesus 
Christ is able to give life more abundantly because He can cleanse from sin. Life 
eternal can never be realized until the death caused by sin has been conquered. 
The hope for life rested on finding a cure for sin. The Blood cure has been 
found; holiness has resulted and life eternal is imparted through Jesus Christ 
our Lord.

Holiness is light. "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all." The holy 
are children of light and children of the day. They walk in the light of 
holiness as He is in the light of holiness; they have fellowship one with 
another. God's everlasting kingdom is a kingdom of light. Creatures of the 
darkness cannot be at home in it. They love darkness rather than light because 
it is their true element in which they live.

The sanctified dwell among the saints in light-light where no man approacheth, 
nor can approach, without immortality such as He can impart. Holiness includes 
all the elements necessary to make a redeemed soul at home in the city which 
needeth no sun. The light of the glorious gospel has shined into the heart, 
giving the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. The 
everlasting Kingdom shall have no sundown; it will be high noon forever.

Every man shall naturally go to the place for which he is suited in character to 
live. Of Judas, the traitor, it was said, "that he might go to his own place." 
He went to the place for which he was qualified in character. The same will be 
said of all men, whether sinners or holy; each one shall go to his own place. It 
will not be necessary for a sinner to go down to go to perdition; he will be on 
the level with such a place as the result of his sin: It will not be necessary 
for a saint to go up to heaven; such a one will be already on a level with that 
place. The kingdom of God on earth is as heavenly in its nature as the 
everlasting Kingdom into which the saints shall enter. Heaven is a prepared 
place for a prepared people. The place will suit the people, and the people be 
perfectly suited to the place. The same divine Architect who has gone to prepare 
the place is the same divine Architect who has built the character of the 
inhabitants for that place. 

Therefore, entrance into the everlasting Kingdom depends on moral and spiritual 
fitness. Enjoyment of all that Kingdom includes depends on qualifications and 
capacities which only sanctification can impart. All future hope depends on a 
present fitness and worthiness. Holiness only can meet these requirements.

The seven cardinal virtues, which have engaged our attention in considering the 
truth of holiness, must blend into a unit and become the rule for practice and 
pattern in the life of the sanctified to assure them of entrance into the 
everlasting Kingdom.

Those who shall be accounted worthy of that Kingdom must prove their worthiness 
before God on earth. The manner of proving this is marked out by these seven 
things. These must be added to faith, by bringing them into everyday living as 
the ethics of holiness; and they must be in the heart to constitute the 
experience of holiness; and they must be developed in order to advance in the 
light of holiness. These things must be ever looked upon as the standard of 
holiness.

The issues confronting the sanctified involve great responsibilities. They are 
exhorted to show diligence, lest they fail to meet these responsibilities and 
lose the crown of life to be given to all who are accorded entrance into the 
everlasting Kingdom.

The apostle reveals these things in his admonitions which cover the salient 
facts under three headings.

Fruitfulness in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

"If these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be 
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ."

Mark that it is not sufficient that one have virtue, knowledge, temperance, 
patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity in him: these things must 
be in him and abound. They must be kept at high tide always. They must be always 
at the front. They must be ever in use.

These things are in the soul as the result of sanctification; but they must be 
developed and made to abound by ceaseless praying, careful watchfulness, and 
faithful serving. Such a person will not be barren and unfruitful in this 
experience, which is the perfect knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Sanctification, as has been stated, is that perfect experiential knowledge of 
Jesus Christ. All that He has provided in His death on the cross to cleanse from 
sin is experienced in sanctification; for what is provisional in Christ can 
become experimental in the heart. When cleansing takes place, the heart comes to 
a perfect knowledge of Jesus as the Sanctifier. It then becomes the duty of the 
sanctified to be fruitful in this knowledge. It means that they are to let shine 
out in good works what Christ has wrought within them. Making these graces, that 
Peter mentions, abound in the life will fulfill the responsibilities devolving 
upon the sanctified, and save them from barren and unfruitful lives. 

No certain one of these virtues is to be emphasized to the stunting and ignoring 
of the others. These are to blend in unison to form an abounding life. They 
constitute a choir which must be made to produce harmony in uniting their voices 
as one. No one is to be a soloist. All are to serve together. Virtue will shine 
more and more as knowledge is developed and enlightenment comes to the heart. 
Self-control fixes the boundaries for every desire of body and mind, beyond 
which they must not pass. Patience adds her perfect work to keep one from 
fainting in the race. Godliness silences the opposition by its well-doing. 
Brotherly kindness helps the whole family of God in all its varied needs, and 
charity holds all together in the bond of perfectness, and keeps the wheels of 
toil so well oiled that work is made pleasant. She keeps the heart fervent in 
love for God and man. Such as abound in these things will bear their full 
measure of fruit, and shall hear the Lord say, "Well done, thou good and 
faithful servant ... enter thou into the joy of thy lord."

Progress after holiness has been obtained constitutes growth in grace. Growth in 
grace is necessary to an increased fruitfulness. The sanctified are to be 
"filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the 
glory and praise of God."

Abounding in these graces, through a diligent application of self to holy 
living, advances one from one spiritual level to another still higher. To 
illustrate: The capital city of a certain state is situated on a river. On this 
river the government has constructed a series of locks and dams. To ascend this 
stream and reach this city a steamer enters a lock; the gate behind her is 
closed, and the water is let in from above, lifting the steamer to the higher 
level. From one level to another that is higher the vessel is lifted up until 
the level on which the city is built is obtained.

The sanctified enter the stream of spiritual life which ends at the eternal city 
of God. In obedience to light received, and by diligent application to add these 
things to their faith, as they ascend this stream from day to day they are 
lifted from one level to another which is more advanced; on the rising tide of 
these things they reach the plane on which the city is built; and "Ah entrance 
shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ"

He that lacketh these things. 

"But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath 
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins."

A grave mistake is made if the sanctified fail to appreciate the importance of 
doing these things. To "lack" these things means to run by them unheeding, or to 
let pass as being unimportant, or to become feeble in an effort to practice and 
develop them. Such a one that lacketh these things becomes blind to the point of 
nearsightedness. "He cannot see afar off," says the apostle. Here then is a 
cause of backsliding from holiness. This may be an explanation of the reason why 
many who start well in the way of holiness do not maintain their holy estate 
very long.

There is an exhortation for some "to awake to righteousness." To those who are 
fully aroused to righteous living Christ has promised to give light. The giving 
of more light by the Lord through the Spirit to the sanctified is necessary to 
their growth, and to their safety. But to fail to meet the added 
responsibilities which come with more light will result in blindness. It is only 
by walking in the light that fellowship with God is maintained. This is not only 
a walking in the light received at the time they were sanctified, but it is a 
continual obedience to all light that shall be given afterward.

Mistakes made by the sanctified cease to be mistakes after light has come. To 
offend in them the second time in the face of light will incur guilt, resulting 
in grieving the Spirit, with serious consequences. There is a grave reflection 
on the doctrine and experience of holiness when one makes no perceptible growth 
in knowledge and no marked advancement in the art of holy services. For years, 
many good people have lived subject to their feelings and emotions, rather than 
by advanced faith. The eye of their faith is weak for want of use.

A sanctified man is like a mariner who sails the seven seas. A mariner cannot 
stay always in sight of land if he would have commerce with all nations. He must 
know how to take reckonings of his position by the stars. A sanctified person 
cannot stay near the shore of things, and assure self by feelings. He must put 
out to sea, and by the perfect eye of faith steer his course by the bright and 
morning Star. One must be able to see afar off. Eternal riches are not 
comprehended by the nearsighted. These things are seen clearly by the eye of 
perfect faith.

He that is feeble in his devotion to do these things is blind to their present 
and future worth to himself, to all men, and to Christ. His own present and 
future happiness depends on his doing them. It will result in untold blessings 
for others if he does them. The one great purpose of redemption, the glorifying 
of God, will be accomplished if he does them.

The dire results and fearful consequences that follow such a lack of these 
things are that such persons forget that they were purged from their old sins. 
They forget the pit from whence they were lifted when they fail to give earnest 
heed to these things. They fall again into the same pit of sin through the 
blindness resulting from their own neglect, and utterly forget their lost 
estate. This is apostasy from holiness. It is sinning willfully against the 
knowledge of the truth.

Such can be the terrible ending of all who have been purged from their old sins 
if they run past these things, seeing no necessity for doing them by adding them 
to faith. Reader, do not start for heaven, and through neglect of your known 
duty to maintain holiness, and live it out to the glory of God, end in hell. 

"If ye do these things, ye shall never fall."

The salvation of all persons is conditional upon their own wills. Their 
continuation in a saved relation to God is also conditional upon their wills. 
The often heard, "If a child once, always a child," is not analogous to the 
truth that obtains when a soul is spiritually born. The natural birth is not 
conditional upon the volition of the child born. Such had no choice to make: the 
laws that brought it into being did not operate because of any act of its will 
in the matter. But when a soul is spiritually born, the birth is conditional 
upon the acts of the individual's own will in meeting the conditions which God 
enjoined as being necessary to salvation. Hence the relation that exists ever 
after that is continued subject to the volitions of the person saved. It is not 
a question of "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?" The answer to 
that question is, "Nothing can separate us from the love of God." This is a 
question of what can or may be done by the individual himself that will forfeit 
his state and standing.

That there was a danger of falling the apostle himself clearly shows when he 
issues the warning, "If ye do these things, ye shall never fall." Furthermore, 
there is an exhortation for these to "give diligence to make your calling and 
election sure." If their calling and election were sure, being independent of 
their own will, then why give diligence? "Beware, lest ye be led away with the 
error of the wicked, and fall from your own stedfastness."

Entrance into the everlasting Kingdom will be accorded those who diligently 
strive to maintain their purity at all hazards.

These seven cardinal virtues resident in the heart and soul of the sanctified 
are seven avenues for the outgoings of holiness in heart. These constitute seven 
phases of a sanctified life which must be watched diligently lest there be a 
dropping below the high plane on which they move. A breakdown at any point will 
be attended with fearful losses.

Let virtue shine in all her glory as a witness unto Jesus. Be the product of the 
faith confessed. Show what is believed by what is lived out in everyday life. 
Take time to be holy, even at the sacrifice of pleasure or recreation or 
business. Be poor if need be, but be holy at all costs. Suffer persecutions 
rather than depart from the path of virtue. Cut off a hand or a foot, rather 
than sacrifice virtue. Be a martyr if it is necessary; but be a saint by all 
means.

Advance in spiritual knowledge. Develop the mind along lines that will afford 
profits in the end. Keep the mind employed, but let it be employed in holy 
pursuits. There are many things which one does not need to know in order to be 
saved eternally. Employ the mind in things that accompany salvation. Make no 
excuses for ignorance in the art of holy living; deplore it as if it were sin. 
Ignorance is inexcusable since the Holy Ghost is come to make the saints wise, 
"understanding what the will of the Lord is."

Let self-control be developed along all lines. The body must be kept under, and 
all its appetites suppressed. They are not sinful, but can afford the devil an 
avenue of approach to defile the soul. Let the sanctified keep a grip on 
themselves in all their physical inclinations, and a great battle will be won in 
the daily life of holiness.

Be patient unto all men. Patiently wait on the Lord in all matters. If He is not 
in a hurry, why should we hurry?

Let godlikeness be revealed in every manner of life. Be godlike at the cost of 
appearing peculiar. To cultivate godliness requires wisdom and persistence. Let 
godliness peep out from under the rough exterior of an uncultured body. It will 
make up for all the deprivations that have been suffered.

Let brotherly love predominate. Let it be a shield of protection against the 
rough edges encountered by contact with others. Love can keep the grit out of 
the bearings, that life may run smooth. It can pour oil on troubled waters, and 
effect a great calm. It can change the course of an onrushing storm of strife, 
and hang the rainbow of peace across its retreating clouds. Charity shall cover 
the multitude of sins. "Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make 
your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall: 
for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ." 

A charge to keep I have, 
A God to glorify, 
A never-dying soul to save, 
And fit it for the sky. 

To serve the present age, 
My calling to fulfill; 
Oh, may it all my powers engage 
To do my Master's will. 

Arm me with jealous care, 
As in Thy sight to live; 
And, oh, Thy servant, Lord, prepare 
A strict account to give. 

Help me to watch and pray, 
And on thyself rely, 
Assured if I my trust betray 
I shall forever die. 

-- Charles Wesley -- 





THE END 

